<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII: School-Girl Notions</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">School-Girl Notions</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>During Iola’s stay in the North she found a strong tide of opposition against slavery. Arguments against the institution had entered the Church and made legislative halls the arenas of fierce debate. The subject had become part of the social converse of the fireside, and had enlisted the best brain and heart of the country. Anti-slavery discussions were pervading the strongest literature and claiming, a place on the most popular platforms.</p>
			<p>Iola, being a Southern girl and a slave-holder’s daughter, always defended slavery when it was under discussion.</p>
			<p>“Slavery can’t be wrong,” she would say, “for my father is a slave-holder, and my mother is as good to our servants as she can be. My father often tells her that she spoils them, and lets them run over her. I never saw my father strike one of them. I love my mammy as much as I do my own mother, and I believe she loves us just as if we were her own children. When we are sick I am sure that she could not do anything more for us than she does.”</p>
			<p>“But, Iola,” responded one of her school friends, “after all, they are not free. Would you be satisfied to have the most beautiful home, the costliest jewels, or the most elegant wardrobe if you were a slave?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, the cases are not parallel. Our slaves do not want their freedom.<br/>
			They would not take it if we gave it to them.”<br/></p>
			<p>“That is not the case with them all. My father has seen men who have encountered almost incredible hardships to get their freedom. Iola, did you ever attend an anti-slavery meeting?”</p>
			<p>“No; I don’t think these Abolitionists have any right to meddle in our affairs. I believe they are prejudiced against us, and want to get our property. I read about them in the papers when I was at home. I don’t want to hear my part of the country run down. My father says the slaves would be very well contented if no one put wrong notions in their heads.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” was the response of her friend, “but I do not think that that slave mother who took her four children, crossed the Ohio River on the ice, killed one of the children and attempted the lives of the other two, was a contented slave. And that other one, who, running away and finding herself pursued, threw herself over the Long Bridge into the Potomac, was evidently not satisfied. I do not think the numbers who are coming North on the Underground Railroad can be very contented. It is not natural for people to run away from happiness, and if they are so happy and contented, why did Congress pass the Fugitive Slave Bill?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I don’t think,” answered Iola, “any of our slaves would run away. I know mamma don’t like slavery very much. I have often heard her say that she hoped the time would come when there would not be a slave in the land. My father does not think as she does. He thinks slavery is not wrong if you treat them well and don’t sell them from their families. I intend, after I have graduated, to persuade pa to buy a house in New Orleans, and spend the winter there. You know this will be my first season out, and I hope that you will come and spend the winter with me. We will have such gay times, and you will so fall in love with our sunny South that you will never want to come back to shiver amid the snows and cold of the North. I think one winter in the South would cure you of your Abolitionism.”</p>
			<p>“Have you seen her yet?”</p>
			<p>This question was asked by Louis Bastine, an attorney who had come North in the interests of Lorraine. The scene was the New England village where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Galen’s academy was located, and which Iola was attending. This question was addressed to Camille Lecroix, Bastine’s intimate friend, who had lately come North. He was the son of a planter who lived near Leroy’s plantation, and was familiar with Iola’s family history. Since his arrival North, Bastine had met him and communicated to him his intentions.</p>
			<p>“Yes; just caught a glimpse of her this morning as she was going down the street,” was Camille’s reply.</p>
			<p>“She is a most beautiful creature,” said Louis Bastine. “She has the proud poise of Leroy, the most splendid eyes I ever saw in a woman’s head, lovely complexion, and a glorious wealth of hair. She would bring $2000 any day in a New Orleans market.”</p>
			<p>“I always feel sorry,” said Camille, “when I see one of those Creole girls brought to the auction block. I have known fathers who were deeply devoted to their daughters, but who through some reverse of fortune were forced to part with them, and I always think the blow has been equally terrible on both sides. I had a friend who had two beautiful daughters whom he had educated in the North. They were cultured, and really belles in society. They were entirely ignorant of their lineage, but when their father died it was discovered that their mother had been a slave. It was a fearful blow. They would have faced poverty, but the knowledge of their tainted blood was more than they could bear.”</p>
			<p>“What became of them?”</p>
			<p>“They both died, poor girls. I believe they were as much killed by the blow as if they had been shot. To tell you the truth, Bastine, I feel sorry for this girl. I don’t believe she has the least idea of her negro blood.”</p>
			<p>“No, Leroy has been careful to conceal it from her,” replied Bastine.</p>
			<p>“Is that so?” queried Camille. “Then he has made a great mistake.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t help that,” said Bastine; “business is business.”</p>
			<p>“How can you get her away?” asked Camille. “You will have to be very cautious, because if these pesky Abolitionists get an inkling of what you’re doing they will balk your game double quick. And when you come to look at it, isn’t it a shame to attempt to reduce that girl to slavery? She is just as white as we are, as good as any girl in the land, and better educated than thousands of white girls. A girl with her apparent refinement and magnificent beauty, were it not for the cross in her blood, I would be proud to introduce to our set. She would be the sensation of the season. I believe to-day it would be easier for me to go to the slums and take a young girl from there, and have her introduced as my wife, than to have society condone the offense if I married that lovely girl. There is not a social circle in the South that would not take it as a gross insult to have her introduced into it.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Bastine, “my plan is settled. Leroy has never allowed her to spend her vacations at home. I understand she is now very anxious to get home, and, as Lorraine’s attorney, I have come on his account to take her home.”</p>
			<p>“How will you do it?”</p>
			<p>“I shall tell her her father is dangerously ill, and desires her to come as quickly as possible.”</p>
			<p>“And what then?”</p>
			<p>“Have her inventoried with the rest of the property.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t she know that her father is dead?”</p>
			<p>“I think not,” said Bastine. “She is not in mourning, but appeared very light-hearted this morning, laughing and talking with two other girls. I was struck with her great beauty, and asked a gentleman who she was. He said, ‘Miss Leroy, of Mississippi.’ I think Lorraine has managed the affair so as to keep her in perfect ignorance of her father’s death. I don’t like the job, but I never let sentiment interfere with my work.”</p>
			<p>Poor Iola! When she said slavery was not a bad thing, little did she think that she was destined to drink to its bitter dregs the cup she was so ready to press to the lips of others.</p>
			<p>“How do you think she will take to her situation?” asked Camille.</p>
			<p>“O, I guess,” said Bastine, “she will sulk and take it pretty hard at first; but if she is managed right she will soon get over it. Give her plenty of jewelry, fine clothes, and an easy time.”</p>
			<p>“All this business must be conducted with the utmost secrecy and speed. Her mother could not have written to her, for she has been suffering with brain fever and nervous prostration since Leroy’s death. Lorraine knows her market value too well, and is too shrewd to let so much property pass out of his hands without making an effort to retain it.”</p>
			<p>“Has she any brothers or sisters?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, a brother,” replied Bastine; “but he is at another school, and I have no orders from Lorraine in reference to him. If I can get the girl I am willing to let well enough alone. I dread the interview with the principal more than anything else. I am afraid he will hem and haw, and have his doubts. Perhaps, when he sees my letters and hears my story, I can pull the wool over his eyes.”</p>
			<p>“But, Louis, this is a pitiful piece of business. I should hate to be engaged in it.”</p>
			<p>A deep flush of shame overspread for a moment the face of Lorraine’s attorney, as he replied: “I don’t like the job, but I have undertaken it, and must go through with it.”</p>
			<p>“I see no ‘<em>must</em>‘ about it. Were I in your place I would wash my hands of the whole business.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t afford it,” was Bastine’s hard, business-like reply. On the next morning after this conversation between these two young men, Louis Bastine presented himself to the principal of the academy, with the request that Iola be permitted to leave immediately to attend the sick-bed of her father, who was dangerously ill. The principal hesitated, but while he was deliberating, a telegram, purporting to come from Iola’s mother, summoned Iola to her father’s bedside without delay. The principal, set at rest in regard to the truthfulness of the dispatch, not only permitted but expedited her departure.</p>
			<p>Iola and Bastine took the earliest train, and traveled without pausing until they reached a large hotel in a Southern city. There they were obliged to wait a few hours until they could resume their journey, the train having failed to make connection. Iola sat in a large, lonely parlor, waiting for the servant to show her to a private room. She had never known a great sorrow. Never before had the shadows of death mingled with the sunshine of her life.</p>
			<p>Anxious, travel-worn, and heavy-hearted, she sat in an easy chair, with nothing to divert her from the grief and anxiety which rendered every delay a source of painful anxiety.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I hope that he will be alive and growing better!” was the thought which kept constantly revolving in her mind, until she fell asleep. In her dreams she was at home, encircled in the warm clasp of her father’s arms, feeling her mother’s kisses lingering on her lips, and hearing the joyous greetings of the servants and Mammy Liza’s glad welcome as she folded her to her heart. From this dream of bliss she was awakened by a burning kiss pressed on her lips, and a strong arm encircling her. Gazing around and taking in the whole situation, she sprang from her seat, her eyes flashing with rage and scorn, her face flushed to the roots of her hair, her voice shaken with excitement, and every nerve trembling with angry emotion.</p>
			<p>“How dare you do such a thing! Don’t you know if my father were here he would crush you to the earth?”</p>
			<p>“Not so fast, my lovely tigress,” said Bastine, “your father knew what he was doing when he placed you in my charge.”</p>
			<p>“My father made a great mistake, if he thought he had put me in charge of a gentleman.”</p>
			<p>“I am your guardian for the present,” replied Bastine. “I am to see you safe home, and then my commission ends.”</p>
			<p>“I wish it were ended now,” she exclaimed, trembling with anger and mortification. Her voice was choked by emotion, and broken by smothered sobs. Louis Bastine thought to himself, “she is a real spitfire, but beautiful even in her wrath.”</p>
			<p>During the rest of her journey Iola preserved a most freezing reserve towards Bastine. At length the journey was ended. Pale and anxious she rode up the avenue which led to her home.</p>
			<p>A strange silence pervaded the place. The servants moved sadly from place to place, and spoke in subdued tones. The windows were heavily draped with crape, and a funeral air pervaded the house.</p>
			<p>Mammy Liza met her at the door, and, with streaming eyes and convulsive sobs, folded her to her heart, as Iola exclaimed, in tones of hopeless anguish:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Oh, papa’s dead!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my pore baby!” said mammy, “ain’t you hearn tell ’bout it? Yore par’s dead, an’ your mar’s bin drefful sick. She’s better now.”</p>
			<p>Mam Liza stepped lightly into <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s room, and gently apprised her of Iola’s arrival. In a darkened room lay the stricken mother, almost distracted by her late bereavement.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Iola,” she exclaimed, as her daughter entered, “is this you? I am so sorry you came.”</p>
			<p>Then, burying her head in Iola’s bosom, she wept convulsively. “Much as I love you,” she continued, between her sobs, “and much as I longed to see you, I am sorry you came.”</p>
			<p>“Why, mother,” replied Iola, astonished, “I received your telegram last<br/>
			Wednesday, and I took the earliest train I could get.”<br/></p>
			<p>“My dear child, I never sent you a telegram. It was a trick to bring you down South and reduce you to slavery.”</p>
			<p>Iola eyed her mother curiously. What did she mean? Had grief dethroned her reason? Yet her eye was clear, her manner perfectly rational.</p>
			<p>Marie saw the astounded look on Iola’s face, and nerving herself to the task, said: “Iola, I must tell you what your father always enjoined me to be silent about. I did not think it was the wisest thing, but I yielded to his desires. I have negro blood in my veins. I was your father’s slave before I married him. His relatives have set aside his will. The courts have declared our marriage null and void and my manumission illegal, and we are all to be remanded to slavery.”</p>
			<p>An expression of horror and anguish swept over Iola’s face, and, turning deathly pale, she exclaimed, “Oh, mother, it can’t be so! you must be dreaming!”</p>
			<p>“No, my child; it is a terrible reality.”</p>
			<p>Almost wild with agony, Iola paced the floor, as the fearful truth broke in crushing anguish upon her mind. Then bursting into a paroxysm of tears succeeded by peals of hysterical laughter, said:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I used to say that slavery is right. I didn’t know what I was talking about.” Then growing calmer, she said, “Mother, who is at the bottom of this downright robbery?”</p>
			<p>“Alfred Lorraine; I have always dreaded that man, and what I feared has come to pass. Your father had faith in him; I never had.”</p>
			<p>“But, mother, could we not contest his claim. You have your marriage certificate and papa’s will.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my dear child, but Judge Starkins has decided that we have no standing in the court, and no testimony according to law.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mother, what can I do?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing, my child, unless you can escape to the North.”</p>
			<p>“And leave you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Mother, I will never desert you in your hour of trial. But can nothing be done? Had father no friends who would assist us?”</p>
			<p>“None that I know of. I do not think he had an acquaintance who approved of our marriage. The neighboring planters have stood so aloof from me that I do not know where to turn for either help or sympathy. I believe it was Lorraine who sent the telegram. I wrote to you as soon as I could after your father’s death, but fainted just as I finished directing the letter. I do not think he knows where your brother is, and, if possible, he must not know. If you can by any means, <em>do</em> send a letter to Harry and warn him not to attempt to come home. I don’t know how you will succeed, for Lorraine has us all under surveillance. But it is according to law.”</p>
			<p>“What law, mother?”</p>
			<p>“The law of the strong against the weak.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mother, it seems like a dreadful dream, a fearful nightmare! But I cannot shake it off. Where is Gracie?”</p>
			<p>“The dear child has been running down ever since her papa’s death. She clung to me night and day while I had the brain fever, and could not be persuaded to leave me. She hardly ate anything for more than a week. She has been dangerously ill for several days, and the doctor says she cannot live. The fever has exhausted all her rallying power, and yet, dear as she is to me, I would rather consign her to the deepest grave than see her forced to be a slave.”</p>
			<p>“So would I. I wish I could die myself.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Iola, do not talk so. Strive to be a Christian, to have faith in the darkest hour. Were it not for my hope of heaven I couldn’t stand all this trouble.”</p>
			<p>“Mother, are these people Christians who made these laws which are robbing us of our inheritance and reducing us to slavery? If this is Christianity I hate and despise it. Would the most cruel heathen do worse?”</p>
			<p>“My dear child, I have not learned my Christianity from them. I have learned it at the foot of the cross, and from this book,” she said, placing a New Testament in Iola’s hands. “Some of the most beautiful lessons of faith and trust I have ever learned were from among our lowly people in their humble cabins.”</p>
			<p>“Mamma!” called a faint voice from the adjoining room. Marie immediately arose and went to the bedside of her sick child, where Mammy Liza was holding her faithful vigils. The child had just awakened from a fitful sleep.</p>
			<p>“I thought,” she said, “that I heard Iola’s voice. Has she come?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, darling; do you want to see her?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes,” she said, as a bright smile broke over her dying features.</p>
			<p>Iola passed quickly into the room. Gracie reached out her thin, bloodless hand, clasped Iola’s palm in hers, and said: “I am so glad you have come. Dear Iola, stand by mother. You and Harry are all she has. It is not hard to die. You and mother and Harry must meet me in heaven.”</p>
			<p>Swiftly the tidings went through the house that Gracie was dying. The servants gathered around her with tearful eyes, as she bade them all good-bye. When she had finished, and Mammy had lowered the pillow, an unwonted radiance lit up her eye, and an expression of ineffable gladness overspread her face, as she murmured: “It is beautiful, so beautiful!” Fainter and fainter grew her voice, until, without a struggle or sigh, she passed away beyond the power of oppression and prejudice.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
