<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>VIII</h2>
			<h3>The Mystified Doctor</h3>
			<p>“Colonel,” said <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham to <abbr>Col.</abbr> Robinson, the commander of the post,<br/>
			“I am perfectly mystified by Miss Leroy.”<br/></p>
			<p>“What is the matter with her?” asked <abbr>Col.</abbr> Robinson. “Is she not faithful to her duties and obedient to your directions?”</p>
			<p>“Faithful is not the word to express her tireless energy and devotion to her work,” responded <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham. “She must have been a born nurse to put such enthusiasm into her work.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Doctor, what is the matter with you? You talk like a lover.”</p>
			<p>A faint flush rose to the cheek of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham as he smiled, and said, “Oh! come now, Colonel, can’t a man praise a woman without being in love with her?”</p>
			<p>“Of course he can,” said <abbr>Col.</abbr> Robinson; “but I know where such admiration is apt to lead. I’ve been there myself. But, Doctor, had you not better defer your love-making till you’re out of the woods?”</p>
			<p>“I assure you, Colonel, I am not thinking of love or courtship. That is the business of the drawing-room, and not of the camp. But she did mystify me last night.”</p>
			<p>“How so?” asked <abbr>Col.</abbr> Robinson.</p>
			<p>“When Tom was dying,” responded the doctor, “I saw that beautiful and refined young lady bend over and kiss him. When she found that he was dead, she just cried as if her heart was breaking. Well, that was a new thing to me. I can eat with colored people, walk, talk, and fight with them, but kissing them is something I don’t hanker after.”</p>
			<p>“And yet you saw Miss Leroy do it?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; and that puzzles me. She is one of the most refined and lady-like women I ever saw. I hear she is a refugee, but she does not look like the other refugees who have come to our camp. Her accent is slightly Southern, but her manner is Northern. She is self-respecting without being supercilious; quiet, without being dull. Her voice is low and sweet, yet at times there are tones of such passionate tenderness in it that you would think some great sorrow has darkened and overshadowed her life. Without being the least gloomy, her face at times is pervaded by an air of inexpressible sadness. I sometimes watch her when she is not aware that I am looking at her, and it seems as if a whole volume was depicted on her countenance. When she smiles, there is a longing in her eyes which is never satisfied. I cannot understand how a Southern lady, whose education and manners stamp her as a woman of fine culture and good breeding, could consent to occupy the position she so faithfully holds. It is a mystery I cannot solve. Can you?”</p>
			<p>“I think I can,” answered <abbr>Col.</abbr> Robinson.</p>
			<p>“Will you tell me?” queried the doctor.</p>
			<p>“Yes, on one condition.”</p>
			<p>“What is it?”</p>
			<p>“Everlasting silence.”</p>
			<p>“I promise,” said the doctor. “The secret between us shall be as deep as the sea.”</p>
			<p>“She has not requested secrecy, but at present, for her sake, I do not wish the secret revealed. Miss Leroy was a slave.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no,” said <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham, starting to his feet, “it can’t be so! A woman as white as she a slave?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is so,” continued the Colonel. “In these States the child follows the condition of its mother. This beautiful and accomplished girl was held by one of the worst Rebels in town. Tom told me of it and I issued orders for her release.”</p>
			<p>“Well, well! Is that so?” said <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham, thoughtfully stroking his beard. “Wonders will never cease. Why, I was just beginning to think seriously of her.”</p>
			<p>“What’s to hinder your continuing to think?” asked <abbr>Col.</abbr> Robinson.</p>
			<p>“What you tell me changes the whole complexion of affairs,” replied the doctor.</p>
			<p>“If that be so I am glad I told you before you got head over heels in love.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham, absently.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham was a member of a wealthy and aristocratic family, proud of its lineage, which it could trace through generations of good blood to its ancestral isle. He had become deeply interested in Iola before he had heard her story, but after it had been revealed to him he tried to banish her from his mind; but his constant observation of her only increased his interest and admiration. The deep pathos of her story, the tenderness of her ministrations, bestowed alike on black and white, and the sad loneliness of her condition, awakened within him a desire to defend and protect her all through her future life. The fierce clashing of war had not taken all the romance out of his nature. In Iola he saw realized his ideal of the woman whom he was willing to marry. A woman, tender, strong, and courageous, and rescued only by the strong arm of his Government from a fate worse than death. She was young in years, but old in sorrow; one whom a sad destiny had changed from a light-hearted girl to a heroic woman. As he observed her, he detected an undertone of sorrow in her most cheerful words, and observed a quick flushing and sudden paling of her cheek, as if she were living over scenes that were thrilling her soul with indignation or chilling her heart with horror. As nurse and physician, Iola and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham were constantly thrown together. His friends sent him magazines and books, which he gladly shared with her. The hospital was a sad place. Mangled forms, stricken down in the flush of their prime and energy; pale young corpses, sacrificed on the altar of slavery, constantly drained on her sympathies. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham was glad to have some reading matter which might divert her mind from the memories of her mournful past, and also furnish them both with interesting themes of conversation in their moments of relaxation from the harrowing scenes through which they were constantly passing. Without any effort or consciousness on her part, his friendship ripened into love. To him her presence was a pleasure, her absence a privation; and her loneliness drew deeply upon his sympathy. He would have merited his own self-contempt if, by word or deed, he had done anything to take advantage of her situation. All the manhood and chivalry of his nature rose in her behalf, and, after carefully revolving the matter, he resolved to win her for his bride, bury her secret in his Northern home, and hide from his aristocratic relations all knowledge of her mournful past. One day he said to Iola:⁠—</p>
			<p>“This hospital life is telling on you. Your strength is failing, and although you possess a wonderful amount of physical endurance, you must not forget that saints have bodies and dwell in tabernacles of clay, just the same as we common mortals.”</p>
			<p>“Compliments aside,” she said, smiling; “what are you driving at,<br/>
			Doctor?”<br/></p>
			<p>“I mean,” he replied, “that you are running down, and if you do not quit and take some rest you will be our patient instead of our nurse. You’d better take a furlough, go North, and return after the first frost.”</p>
			<p>“Doctor, if that is your only remedy,” replied Iola, “I am afraid that I am destined to die at my post. I have no special friends in the North, and no home but this in the South. I am homeless and alone.”</p>
			<p>There was something so sad, almost despairing in her tones, in the drooping of her head, and the quivering of her lip, that they stirred <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gresham’s heart with sudden pity, and, drawing nearer to her, he said, “Miss Leroy, you need not be all alone. Let me claim the privilege of making your life bright and happy. Iola, I have loved you ever since I have seen your devotion to our poor, sick boys. How faithfully you, a young and gracious girl, have stood at your post and performed your duties. And now I ask, will you not permit me to clasp hands with you for life? I do not ask for a hasty reply. Give yourself time to think over what I have proposed.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
