<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX: Striking Contrasts</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Striking Contrasts</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The next day, Robert, accompanied by Iola, went to the settlement to take supper with Aunt Linda, and a very luscious affair it was. Her fingers had not lost their skill since she had tasted the sweets of freedom. Her biscuits were just as light and flaky as ever. Her jelly was as bright as amber, and her preserves were perfectly delicious. After she had set the table she stood looking in silent admiration, chuckling to herself: “Ole Mistus can’t set sich a table as dat. She ought’er be yere to see it. Specs ’twould make her mouf water. Well, I mus’ let bygones be bygones. But dis yere freedom’s mighty good.”</p>
			<p>Aunt Linda had invited Uncle Daniel, and, wishing to give him a pleasant surprise, she had refrained from telling him that Robert Johnson was the one she wished him to meet.</p>
			<p>“Do you know dis gemmen?” said Aunt Linda to Uncle Daniel, when the latter arrived.</p>
			<p>“Well, I can’t say’s I do. My eyes is gittin dim, an I disremembers him.”</p>
			<p>“Now jis’ you look right good at him. Don’t yer ’member him?”</p>
			<p>Uncle Daniel looked puzzled and, slowly scanning Robert’s features, said: “He do look like somebody I used ter know, but I can’t make him out ter save my life. I don’t know whar to place him. Who is de gemmen, ennyhow?”</p>
			<p>“Why, Uncle Dan’el,” replied Aunt Linda, “dis is Robby; Miss Nancy’s bad, mischeebous Robby, dat war allers playin’ tricks on me.”</p>
			<p>“Well, shore’s I’se born, ef dis ain’t our ole Bobby!” exclaimed Uncle Daniel, delightedly. “Why, chile, whar did yer come from? Thought you war dead an’ buried long ’go.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Uncle Daniel, did you send anybody to kill me?” asked Robert, laughingly.</p>
			<p>“Oh, no’n ’deed, chile! but I yeard dat you war killed in de battle, an’<br/>
			I never ’spected ter see you agin.”<br/></p>
			<p>“Well, here I am,” replied Robert, “large as life, and just as natural. And this young lady, Uncle Daniel, I believe is my niece.” As he spoke he turned to Iola. “Do you remember my mother?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes,” said Uncle Daniel, looking intently at Iola as she stepped forward and cordially gave him her hand.</p>
			<p>“Well, I firmly believe,” continued Robert, “that this is the daughter of the little girl whom Miss Nancy sold away with my mother.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I’se rale glad ter see her. She puts me mighty much in mine ob dem days wen we war all young togedder; wen Miss Nancy sed, ‘Harriet war too high fer her.’ It jis’ seems like yisterday wen I yeard Miss Nancy say, ‘No house could flourish whar dere war two mistresses.’ Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robert⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, no, Uncle Daniel,” interrupted Robert, “don’t say that! Call me<br/>
			Robby or Bob, just as you used to.”<br/></p>
			<p>“Well, Bobby, I’se glad klar from de bottom of my heart ter see yer.”</p>
			<p>“Even if you wouldn’t go with us when we left?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Bobby, dem war mighty tryin’ times. You boys didn’t know it, but Marster Robert hab giben me a bag ob money ter take keer ob, an’ I promised him I’d do it an’ I had ter be ez good ez my word.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Uncle Daniel, why didn’t you tell us boys all about it? We could have helped you take care of it.”</p>
			<p>“Now, wouldn’t dat hab bin smart ter let on ter you chaps, an’ hab you huntin’ fer it from Dan ter Barsheba? I specs some ob you would bin a rootin’ fer it yit!”</p>
			<p>“Well, Uncle Daniel, we were young then; I can’t tell what we would have done if we had found it. But we are older now.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yer older, but I wouldn’t put it pas’ yer eben now, ef yer foun’ out whar it war.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Iola, laughing, “they say ‘caution is the parent of safety.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Money’s a mighty tempting thing,” said Robert, smiling.</p>
			<p>“But, Robby, dere’s nothin’ like a klar conscience; a klar conscience,<br/>
			Robby!”<br/></p>
			<p>Just then Aunt Linda, who had been completing the preparations for her supper, entered the room with her husband, and said, “Salters, let me interdoos you ter my fren’, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robert Johnson, an’ his niece, Miss Leroy.”</p>
			<p>“Why, is it possible,” exclaimed Robert, rising, and shaking hands, “that you are Aunt Linda’s husband?”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s what de parson sed,” replied Salters.</p>
			<p>“I thought,” pursued Robert, “that your name was John Andrews. It was such when you were in my company.”</p>
			<p>“All de use I’se got fer dat name is ter git my money wid it; an’ wen dat’s done, all’s done. Got ’nuff ob my ole Marster in slave times, widout wearin’ his name in freedom. Wen I got done wid him, I got done wid his name. Wen I ’listed, I war John Andrews; and wen I gits my pension, I’se John Andrews; but now Salters is my name, an’ I likes it better.”</p>
			<p>“But how came you to be Aunt Linda’s husband? Did you get married since the war?”</p>
			<p>“Lindy an’ me war married long ’fore de war. But my ole Marster sole me away from her an’ our little gal, an’ den sole her chile ter somebody else. Arter freedom, I hunted up our little gal, an’ foun’ her. She war a big woman den. Den I com’d right back ter dis place an’ foun’ Lindy. She hedn’t married agin, nuther hed I; so we jis’ let de parson marry us out er de book; an’ we war mighty glad ter git togedder agin, an’ feel hitched togedder fer life.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Uncle Daniel,” said Robert, turning the conversation toward him, “you and Uncle Ben wouldn’t go with us, but you came out all right at last.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed,” said Aunt Linda, “Ben got inter a stream of luck. Arter freedom com’d, de people had a heap of fath in Ben; an’ wen dey wanted some one to go ter Congress dey jist voted for Ben ter go. An’ he went, too. An’ wen Salters went to Washin’ton to git his pension, who should he see dere wid dem big men but our Ben, lookin’ jist as big as any ob dem.”</p>
			<p>“An’ it did my ole eyes good jist ter see it,” broke in Salters; “if I couldn’t go dere myself, I war mighty glad to see some one ob my people dat could. I felt like de boy who, wen somebody said he war gwine to slap off his face, said, ‘Yer kin slap off my face, but I’se got a big brudder, an’ you can’t slap off his face.’ I went to see him ’fore I lef, and he war jist de same as he war wen we war boys togedder. He hadn’t got de big head a bit.”</p>
			<p>“I reckon Mirandy war mighty sorry she didn’t stay wid him. I know I should be,” said Aunt Linda.</p>
			<p>“Uncle Daniel,” asked Robert, “are you still preaching?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, chile, I’se still firing off de Gospel gun.”</p>
			<p>“I hear some of the Northern folks are down here teaching theology, that is, teaching young men how to preach. Why don’t you study theology?”</p>
			<p>“Look a yere, boy, I’se been a preachin’ dese thirty years, an’ you come yere a tellin’ me ’bout studying yore ologies. I larn’d my ’ology at de foot ob de cross. You bin dar?”</p>
			<p>“Dear Uncle Daniel,” said Iola, “the moral aspect of the nation would be changed if it would learn at the same cross to subordinate the spirit of caste to the spirit of Christ.”</p>
			<p>“Does yer ’member Miss Nancy’s Harriet,” asked Aunt Linda, “dat she sole away kase she wouldn’t let her whip her? Well, we think dis is Harriet’s gran’chile. She war sole away from her mar, an’ now she’s a lookin’ fer her.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I hopes she may fine her,” replied Salters. “I war sole ’way from my mammy wen I war eighteen mont’s ole, an’ I wouldn’t know her now from a bunch ob turnips.”</p>
			<p>“I,” said Iola, “am on my way South seeking for my mother, and I shall not give up until I find her.”</p>
			<p>“Come,” said Aunt Linda, “we mustn’t stan’ yer talkin’, or de grub’ll git cole. Come, frens, sit down, an’ eat some ob my pore supper.”</p>
			<p>Aunt Linda sat at the table in such a flutter of excitement that she could hardly eat, but she gazed with intense satisfaction on her guests. Robert sat on her right hand, contrasting Aunt Linda’s pleasant situation with the old days in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson’s kitchen, where he had played his pranks upon her, and told her the news of the war.</p>
			<p>Over Iola there stole a spirit of restfulness. There was something so motherly in Aunt Linda’s manner that it seemed to recall the bright, sunshiny days when she used to nestle in Mam Liza’s arms, in her own happy home. The conversation was full of army reminiscences and recollections of the days of slavery. Uncle Daniel was much interested, and, as they rose from the table, exclaimed:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Robby, seein’ yer an’ hearin’ yer talk, almos’ puts new springs inter me. I feel ’mos’ like I war gittin’ younger.”</p>
			<p>After the supper, Salters and his guests returned to the front room, which Aunt Linda regarded with so much pride, and on which she bestowed so much care.</p>
			<p>“Well, Captin,” said Salters, “I neber ’spected ter see you agin. Do you know de las’ time I seed yer? Well, you war on a stretcher, an’ four ob us war carryin’ you ter de hospital. War you much hurt?</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Robert, “it was only a flesh wound; and this young lady nursed me so carefully that I soon got over it.”</p>
			<p>“Is dat de way you foun’ her?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Andrews,”⁠—</p>
			<p>“Salters, ef you please,” interrupted Salters. I’se only Andrews wen I gits my money.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Salters,” continued Robert, “our freedom was a costly thing. Did you know that Captain Sybil was killed in one of the last battles of the war? These young chaps, who are taking it so easy, don’t know the hardships through which we older ones passed. But all the battles are not fought, nor all the victories won. The colored man has escaped from one slavery, and I don’t want him to fall into another. I want the young folks to keep their brains clear, and their right arms strong, to fight the battles of life manfully, and take their places alongside of every other people in this country. And I cannot see what is to hinder them if they get a chance.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t nuther,” said Salters. “I don’t see dat dey drinks any more dan anybody else, nor dat dere is any meanness or debilment dat a black man kin do dat a white man can’t keep step wid him.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” assented Robert, “but while a white man is stealing a thousand dollars, a black man is getting into trouble taking a few chickens.”</p>
			<p>“All that may be true,” said Iola, “but there are some things a white man can do that we cannot afford to do.”</p>
			<p>“I beliebs eberybody, Norf and Souf, is lookin’ at us; an’ some ob dem ain’t got no good blood fer us, nohow you fix it,” said Salters.</p>
			<p>“I specs cullud folks mus’ hab done somethin’,” interposed Aunt Linda.</p>
			<p>“O, nonsense,” said Robert. “I don’t think they are any worse than the white people. I don’t believe, if we had the power, we would do any more lynching, burning, and murdering than they do.”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s so,” said Aunt Linda, “it’s ralely orful how our folks hab been murdered sence de war. But I don’t think dese young folks is goin’ ter take things as we’s allers done.”</p>
			<p>“We war cowed down from the beginnin’,” said Uncle Daniel, “but dese young folks ain’t comin’ up dat way.”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Salters, “fer one night arter some ob our pore people had been killed, an’ some ob our women had run’d away ’bout seventeen miles, my gran’son, looking me squar in de face, said: ‘Ain’t you got five fingers? Can’t you pull a trigger as well as a white man?’ I tell yer, Cap, dat jis’ got to me, an’ I made up my mine dat my boy should neber call me a coward.”</p>
			<p>“It is not to be expected,” said Robert, “that these young people are going to put up with things as we did, when we weren’t permitted to hold a meeting by ourselves, or to own a club or learn to read.”</p>
			<p>“I tried,” said Salters, “to git a little out’er de book wen I war in de army. On Sundays I sometimes takes a book an’ tries to make out de words, but my eyes is gittin’ dim an’ de letters all run togedder, an’ I gits sleepy, an’ ef yer wants to put me to sleep jis’ put a book in my han’. But wen it comes to gittin’ out a stan’ ob cotton, an’ plantin’ corn, I’se dere all de time. But dat gran’son ob mine is smart as a steel trap. I specs he’ll be a preacher.”</p>
			<p>Salters looked admiringly at his grandson, who sat grinning in the corner, munching a pear he had brought from the table.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Aunt Linda, “his fadder war killed by the Secesh, one night, comin’ home from a politic meetin’, an’ his pore mudder died a few weeks arter, an’ we mean to make a man ob him.”</p>
			<p>“He’s got to larn to work fust,” said Salters, “an’ den ef he’s right smart I’se gwine ter sen’ him ter college. An’ ef he can’t get a libin’ one way, he kin de oder.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Iola, “I hope he will turn out an excellent young man, for the greatest need of the race is noble, earnest men, and true women.”</p>
			<p>“Job,” said Salters, turning to his grandson, “tell Jake ter hitch up de mules, an’ you stay dere an’ help him. We’s all gwine ter de big meetin’. Yore grandma hab set her heart on goin’, an’ it’ll be de same as a spell ob sickness ef she don’t hab a chance to show her bes’ bib an’ tucker. That ole gal’s as proud as a peacock.”</p>
			<p>“Now, John Salters,” exclaimed Aunt Linda, “ain’t you ’shamed ob yourself? Allers tryin’ to poke fun at yer pore wife. Never mine; wait till I’se gone, an’ you’ll miss me.”</p>
			<p>“Ef I war single,” said Salters, “I could git a putty young gal, but it wouldn’t be so easy wid you.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said Iola, smiling.</p>
			<p>“ ’cause young men don’t want ole hens, an’ ole men want young pullets,” was Salter’s reply.</p>
			<p>“Robby, honey,” said Aunt Linda, “when you gits a wife, don’t treat her like dat man treats me.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, his head’s level,” answered Robert; “at least it was in the army.”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s jis’ de way; you see dat, Miss Iola? One man takin’ up for de oder. But I’ll be eben wid you bof. I must go now an’ git ready.”</p>
			<p>Iola laughed. The homely enjoyment of that evening was very welcome to her after the trying scenes through which she had passed. Further conversation was interrupted by the appearance of the wagon, drawn by two fine mules. John Salters stopped joking his wife to admire his mules.</p>
			<p>“Jis’ look at dem,” he said. “Ain’t dey beauties? I bought ’em out ob my bounty-money. Arter de war war ober I had a little money, an’ I war gwine ter rent a plantation on sheers an’ git out a good stan’ ob cotton. Cotton war bringin’ orful high prices den, but Lindy said to me, ‘Now, John, you’se got a lot ob money, an’ you’d better salt it down. I’d ruther lib on a little piece ob lan’ ob my own dan a big piece ob somebody else’s. Well, I says to Lindy, I dun know nuthin’ ’bout buyin’ lan’, an’ I’se ’fraid arter I’se done buyed it an’ put all de marrer ob dese bones in it, dat somebody’s far-off cousin will come an’ say de title ain’t good, an’ I’ll lose it all.”</p>
			<p>“You’re right thar, John,” said Uncle Daniel. “White man’s so unsartain, black man’s nebber safe.”</p>
			<p>“But somehow,” continued Salters, “Lindy warn’t satisfied wid rentin’, so I buyed a piece ob lan’, an’ I’se glad now I’se got it. Lindy’s got a lot ob gumption; knows most as much as a man. She ain’t got dat long head fer nuffin. She’s got lots ob sense, but I don’t like to tell her so.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” asked Iola. “Do you think it would make her feel too happy?”</p>
			<p>“Well, it don’t do ter tell you women how much we thinks ob you. It sets you up too much. Ole Gundover’s overseer war my marster, an’ he used ter lib in dis bery house. I’se fixed it up sence I’se got it. Now I’se better off dan he is, ’cause he tuck to drink, an’ all his frens is gone, an’ he’s in de pore-house.”</p>
			<p>Just then Linda came to the door with her baskets.</p>
			<p>“Now, Lindy, ain’t you ready yet? Do hurry up.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I’se ready, but things wouldn’t go right ef you didn’t hurry me.”</p>
			<p>“Well, put your chicken fixins an’ cake right in yere. Captin, you’ll ride wid me, an’ de young lady an’ my ole woman’ll take de back seat. Uncle Dan’el, dere’s room for you ef you’ll go.”</p>
			<p>“No, I thank you. It’s time fer ole folks to go to bed. Good night! An’, Bobby, I hopes to see you agin’.”<br/></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
