<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX: A Revelation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Revelation</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was a lovely evening for the journey. The air was soft and balmy. The fields and hedges were redolent with flowers. Not a single cloud obscured the brightness of the moon or the splendor of the stars. The ancient trees were festooned with moss, which hung like graceful draperies. Ever and anon a startled hare glided over the path, and whip-poor-wills and crickets broke the restful silence of the night. Robert rode quietly along, quaffing the beauty of the scene and thinking of his boyish days, when he gathered nuts and wild plums in those woods; he also indulged pleasant reminiscences of later years, when, with Uncle Daniel and Tom Anderson, he attended the secret prayer-meetings. Iola rode along, conversing with Aunt Linda, amused and interested at the quaintness of her speech and the shrewdness of her intellect. To her the ride was delightful.</p>
			<p>“Does yer know dis place, Robby,” asked Aunt Linda, as they passed an old resort.</p>
			<p>“I should think I did,” replied Robert. “It is the place where we held our last prayer-meeting.”</p>
			<p>“An’ dere’s dat ole broken pot we used, ter tell ’bout de war. But warn’t ole Miss hoppin’ wen she foun’ out you war goin’ to de war! I thought she’d go almos’ wile. Now, own up, Robby, didn’t you feel kine ob mean to go off widout eben biddin’ her goodbye? An’ I ralely think ole Miss war fon’ ob yer. Now, own up, honey, didn’t yer feel a little down in de mouf wen yer lef’ her.”</p>
			<p>“Not much,” responded Robert. “I only thought she was getting paid back for selling my mother.”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s so, Robby! yore mudder war a likely gal, wid long black hair, an’ kine ob gingerbread color. An’ you neber hearn tell ob her sence dey sole her to Georgia?”</p>
			<p>“Never,” replied Robert, “but I would give everything I have on earth to see her once more. I <em>do</em> hope, if she is living, that I may meet her before I die.”</p>
			<p>“You’s right, boy, cause she lub’d you as she lub’d her own life. Many a time hes she set in my ole cabin an’ cried ’bout yer wen you war fas’ asleep. It’s all ober now, but I’se gwine to hole up fer dem Yankees dat gib me my freedom, an’ sent dem nice ladies from de Norf to gib us some sense. Some ob dese folks calls em nigger teachers, an’ won’t hab nuffin to do wid ’em, but I jis’ thinks dey’s splendid. But dere’s some triflin’ niggers down yere who’ll sell der votes for almost nuffin. Does you ’member Jake Williams an’ Gundover’s Tom? Well dem two niggers is de las’ ob pea-time. Dey’s mighty small pertaters an’ few in a hill.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Aunt Linda,” said Robert, “don’t call them niggers. They are our own people.”</p>
			<p>“Dey ain’t my kine ob people. I jis’ calls em niggers, an’ niggers I means; an’ de bigges’ kine ob niggers. An’ if my John war sich a nigger I’d whip him an’ leave him.”</p>
			<p>“An’ what would I be a doin’,” queried John, suddenly rousing up at the mention of his name.</p>
			<p>“Standing still and taking it, I suppose,” said Iola, who had been quietly listening to and enjoying the conversation.</p>
			<p>“Yes, an’ I’d ketch myself stan’in’ still an’ takin’ it,” was John’s plucky response.</p>
			<p>“Well, you oughter, ef you’s mean enough to wote dat ticket ter put me back inter slavery,” was Aunt Linda’s parting shot. “Robby,” she continued, “you ’member Miss Nancy’s Jinnie?”</p>
			<p>“Of course I do,” said Robert.</p>
			<p>“She married <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gundover’s Dick. Well, dere warn’t much git up an’ go ’bout him. So, wen ’lection time com’d, de man he war workin’ fer tole him ef he woted de radical ticket he’d turn him off. Well, Jinnie war so ’fraid he’d do it, dat she jis’ follered him fer days.”</p>
			<p>“Poor fellow!” exclaimed Robert. “How did he come out?”</p>
			<p>“He certainly was between two fires,” interposed Iola.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Jinnie gained de day. She jis’ got her back up, and said, ‘Now ef yer wote dat ticket ter put me back inter slavery, you take yore rags an’ go.’ An’ Dick jis’ woted de radical ticket. Jake Williams went on de Secesh side, woted whar he thought he’d git his taters, but he got fooled es slick es greese.”</p>
			<p>“How was that?” asked Robert.</p>
			<p>“Some ob dem folks, dat I ’spects buyed his wote, sent him some flour an’ sugar. So one night his wife hab company ter tea. Dey made a big spread, an’ put a lot ob sugar on de table fer supper, an’ Tom jis’ went fer dat sugar. He put a lot in his tea. But somehow it didn’t tase right, an’ wen dey come ter fine out what war de matter, dey hab sent him a barrel ob san’ wid some sugar on top, an’ wen de sugar war all gone de san’ war dare. Wen I yeard it, I jis’ split my sides a larfin. It war too good to keep; an’ wen it got roun’, Jake war as mad as a March hare. But it sarved him right.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Aunt Linda, you musn’t be too hard on Uncle Jake; you know he’s getting old.”</p>
			<p>“Well he ain’t too ole ter do right. He ain’t no older dan Uncle Dan’el. An’ I yered dey offered him $500 ef he’d go on dere side. An’ Uncle Dan’el wouldn’t tech it. An’ dere’s Uncle Job’s wife; why didn’t she go dat way? She war down on Job’s meanness.”</p>
			<p>“What did she do?”</p>
			<p>“Wen ’lection time ’rived, he com’d home bringing some flour an’ meat; an’ he says ter Aunt Polly, ‘Ole woman, I got dis fer de wote.’ She jis’ picked up dat meat an’ flour an’ sent it sailin’ outer doors, an’ den com’d back an’ gib him a good tongue-lashin’. ‘Oder people,’ she said, ‘a wotin’ ter lib good, an’ you a sellin’ yore wote! Ain’t you got ’nuff ob ole Marster, an’ ole Marster bin cuttin’ you up? It shan’t stay yere.’ An’ so she wouldn’t let de things stay in de house.”</p>
			<p>“What did Uncle Job do?”</p>
			<p>“He jis’ stood dere an’ cried.”</p>
			<p>“And didn’t you feel sorry for him?” asked Iola.</p>
			<p>“Not a bit! he hedn’t no business ter be so shabby.”</p>
			<p>“But, Aunt Linda,” pursued Iola, “if it were shabby for an ignorant colored man to sell his vote, wasn’t it shabbier for an intelligent white man to buy it?”</p>
			<p>“You see,” added Robert, “all the shabbiness is not on our side.”</p>
			<p>“I knows dat,” said Aunt Linda, “but I can’t help it. I wants my people to wote right, an’ to think somethin’ ob demselves.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Aunt Linda, they say in every flock of sheep there will be one that’s scabby,” observed Iola.</p>
			<p>“Dat’s so! But I ain’t got no use fer scabby sheep.”</p>
			<p>“Lindy,” cried John, “we’s most dar! Don’t you yere dat singin’? Dey’s begun a’ready.”</p>
			<p>“Neber mine,” said Aunt Linda, “sometimes de las’ ob de wine is de bes’.”</p>
			<p>Thus discoursing they had beguiled the long hours of the night and made their long journey appear short.</p>
			<p>Very soon they reached the church, a neat, commodious, frame building, with a blue ceiling, white walls within and without, and large windows with mahogany-colored facings. It was a sight full of pathetic interest to see that group which gathered from miles around. They had come to break bread with each other, relate their experiences, and tell of their hopes of heaven. In that meeting were remnants of broken families⁠—mothers who had been separated from their children before the war, husbands who had not met their wives for years. After the bread had been distributed and the handshaking was nearly over, Robert raised the hymn which Iola had sung for him when he was recovering from his wounds, and Iola, with her clear, sweet tones, caught up the words and joined him in the strain. When the hymn was finished a dear old mother rose from her seat. Her voice was quite strong. With still a lingering light and fire in her eye, she said:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I rise, bredren an’ sisters, to say I’m on my solemn march to glory.”</p>
			<p>“Amen!” “Glory!” came from a number of voices.</p>
			<p>“I’se had my trials an’ temptations, my ups an’ downs; but I feels I’ll soon be in one ob de many mansions. If it hadn’t been for dat hope I ’spects I would have broken down long ago. I’se bin through de deep waters, but dey didn’t overflow me; I’se bin in de fire, but de smell ob it isn’t on my garments. Bredren an’ sisters, it war a drefful time when I war tored away from my pore little chillen.”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s so!” exclaimed a chorus of voices. Some of her hearers moaned, others rocked to and fro, as thoughts of similar scenes in their own lives arose before them.</p>
			<p>“When my little girl,” continued the speaker, “took hole ob my dress an’ begged me ter let her go wid me, an’ I couldn’t do it, it mos’ broke my heart. I had a little boy, an’ wen my mistus sole me she kep’ him. She carried on a boardin’ house. Many’s the time I hab stole out at night an’ seen dat chile an’ sleep’d wid him in my arms tell mos’ day. Bimeby de people I libed wid got hard up fer money, an’ dey sole me one way an’ my pore little gal de oder; an’ I neber laid my eyes on my pore chillen sence den. But, honeys, let de wind blow high or low, I ’spects to outwedder de storm an’ anchor by’m bye in bright glory. But I’se bin a prayin’ fer one thing, an’ I beliebs I’ll git it; an’ dat is dat I may see my chillen ’fore I die. Pray fer me dat I may hole out an’ hole on, an’ neber make a shipwrack ob faith, an’ at las’ fine my way from earth to glory.”</p>
			<p>Having finished her speech, she sat down and wiped away the tears that flowed all the more copiously as she remembered her lost children. When she rose to speak her voice and manner instantly arrested Robert’s attention. He found his mind reverting to the scenes of his childhood. As she proceeded his attention became riveted on her. Unbidden tears filled his eyes and great sobs shook his frame. He trembled in every limb. Could it be possible that after years of patient search through churches, papers, and inquiring friends, he had accidentally stumbled on his mother⁠—the mother who, long years ago, had pillowed his head upon her bosom and left her parting kiss upon his lips? How should he reveal himself to her? Might not sudden joy do what years of sorrow had failed to accomplish? Controlling his feelings as best he could, he rose to tell his experience. He referred to the days when they used to hold their meetings in the lonely woods and gloomy swamps. How they had prayed for freedom and plotted to desert to the Union army; and continuing, he said: “Since then, brethren and sisters, I have had my crosses and trials, but I try to look at the mercies. Just think what it was then and what it is now! How many of us, since freedom has come, have been looking up our scattered relatives. I have just been over to visit my old mistress, Nancy Johnson, and to see if I could get some clue to my long-lost mother, who was sold from me nearly thirty years ago.”</p>
			<p>Again there was a chorus of moans.</p>
			<p>On resuming, Robert’s voice was still fuller of pathos.</p>
			<p>“When,” he said, “I heard that dear old mother tell her experience it seemed as if someone had risen from the dead. She made me think of my own dear mother, who used to steal out at night to see me, fold me in her arms, and then steal back again to her work. After she was sold away I never saw her face again by daylight. I have been looking for her ever since the war, and I think at last I have got on the right track. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Johnson, who kept the boardinghouse in C⁠⸺, is the one who sold that dear old mother from her son, then she is the one I am looking for, and I am the son she has been praying for.”</p>
			<p>The dear old mother raised her eyes. They were clear and tearless. An expression of wonder, hope, and love flitted over her face. It seemed as if her youth were suddenly renewed and, bounding from her seat, she rushed to the speaker in a paroxysm of joy. “Oh, Robby! Robby! is dis you? Is dat my pore, dear boy I’se been prayin’ ’bout all dese years? Oh, glory! glory!” And overflowing with joyous excitement she threw her arms around him, looking the very impersonation of rapturous content. It was a happy time. Mothers whose children had been torn from them in the days of slavery knew how to rejoice in her joy. The young people caught the infection of the general happiness and rejoiced with them that rejoiced. There were songs of rejoicing and shouts of praise. The undertone of sadness which had so often mingled with their songs gave place to strains of exultation; and tears of tender sympathy flowed from eyes which had often been blurred by anguish. The child of many prayers and tears was restored to his mother.</p>
			<p>Iola stood by the mother’s side, smiling, and weeping tears of joy. When Robert’s mother observed Iola, she said to Robert, “Is dis yore wife?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no,” replied Robert, “but I believe she is your grandchild, the daughter of the little girl who was sold away from you so long ago. She is on her way to the farther South in search of her mother.”</p>
			<p>“Is she? Dear chile! I hope she’ll fine her! She puts me in mine ob my pore little Marie. Well, I’se got one chile, an’ I means to keep on prayin’ tell I fine my daughter. I’m <em>so</em> happy! I feel’s like a new woman!”</p>
			<p>“My dear mother,” said Robert, “now that I have found you, I mean to hold you fast just as long as you live. Ever since the war I have been trying to find out if you were living, but all efforts failed. At last, I thought I would come and hunt you myself and, now that I have found you, I am going to take you home to live with me, and to be as happy as the days are long. I am living in the North, and doing a good business there. I want you to see joy according to all the days wherein you have seen sorrow. I do hope this young lady will find <em>her</em> ma and that, when found, she will prove to be your daughter!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, pore, dear chile! I specs her mudder’s heart’s mighty hungry fer her. I does hope she’s my gran’chile.”</p>
			<p>Tenderly and caressingly Iola bent over the happy mother, with her heart filled with mournful memories of her own mother.</p>
			<p>Aunt Linda was induced to stay until the next morning, and then gladly assisted Robert’s mother in arranging for her journey northward. The friends who had given her a shelter in their hospitable home, learned to value her so much that it was with great reluctance they resigned her to the care of her son. Aunt Linda was full of bustling activity, and her spirits overflowed with good humor.</p>
			<p>“Now, Harriet,” she said, as they rode along on their return journey, “you mus’ jis’ thank me fer finin’ yore chile, ’cause I got him to come to dat big meetin’ wid me.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Lindy,” she cried, “I’se glad from de bottom ob my heart ter see you’s all. I com’d out dere ter git a blessin’, an’ I’se got a double po’tion. De frens I war libin’ wid war mighty good ter me. Dey lib’d wid me in de lower kentry, an’ arter de war war ober I stopped wid ’em and helped take keer ob de chillen; an’ when dey com’d up yere dey brought me wid ’em. I’se com’d a way I didn’t know, but I’se mighty glad I’se com’d.”</p>
			<p>“Does you know dis place?” asked Aunt Linda, as they approached the settlement.</p>
			<p>“No’n ’deed I don’t. It’s all new ter me.”</p>
			<p>“Well, dis is whar I libs. Ain’t you mighty tired? I feels a little stiffish. Dese bones is gittin’ ole.”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s so! But I’se mighty glad I’se lib’d to see my boy ’fore I crossed ober de riber. An’ now I feel like ole Simeon.”</p>
			<p>“But, mother,” said Robert, “if you are ready to go, I am not willing to let you. I want you to stay ever so long where I can see you.”</p>
			<p>A bright smile overspread her face. Robert’s words reassured and gladdened her heart. She was well satisfied to have a pleasant aftermath from life on this side of the river.</p>
			<p>After arriving home Linda’s first thought was to prepare dinner for her guests. But, before she began her work of preparation, she went to the cupboard to get a cup of homemade wine.</p>
			<p>“Here,” she said, filling three glasses, “is some wine I made myself from dat grapevine out dere. Don’t it look nice and clar? Jist taste it. It’s fus’rate.”</p>
			<p>“No, thank you,” said Robert. “I’m a temperance man, and never take anything which has alcohol in it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, dis ain’t got a bit ob alcohol in it. I made it myself.”</p>
			<p>“But, Aunt Linda, you didn’t make the law which ferments grape-juice and makes it alcohol.”</p>
			<p>“But, Robby, ef alcohol’s so bad, w’at made de Lord put it here?”</p>
			<p>“Aunt Lindy,” said Iola, “I heard a lady say that there were two things the Lord didn’t make. One is sin, and the other alcohol.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Aunt Linda,” said Robert, “there are numbers of things the Lord has made that I wouldn’t touch with a pair of tongs.”</p>
			<p>“What are they?”</p>
			<p>“Rattlesnakes, scorpions, and moccasins.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, sho!”</p>
			<p>“Aunt Linda,” said Iola, “the Bible says that the wine at last will bite like a serpent and sting like an adder.”</p>
			<p>“And, Aunt Linda,” added Robert, “as I wouldn’t wind a serpent around my throat, I don’t want to put something inside of it which will bite like a serpent and sting as an adder.”</p>
			<p>“I reckon Robby’s right,” said his mother, setting down her glass and leaving the wine unfinished. “You young folks knows a heap more dan we ole folks.” “Well,” declared Aunt Linda, “you all is temp’rence to de backbone. But what could I do wid my wine ef we didn’t drink it?”</p>
			<p>“Let it turn to vinegar, and sign the temperance pledge,” replied Robert.</p>
			<p>“I don’t keer ’bout it myself, but I don’t ’spect John would be willin’ ter let it go, ’cause he likes it a heap.”</p>
			<p>“Then you must give it up for his sake and Job’s,” said Robert. “They may learn to like it too well.”</p>
			<p>“You know, Aunt Linda,” said Iola, “people don’t get to be drunkards all at once. And you wouldn’t like to feel, if Job should learn to drink, that you helped form his appetite.”</p>
			<p>“Dat’ so! I beliebs I’ll let dis turn to winegar, an’ not make any more.”</p>
			<p>“That’s right, Aunt Linda. I hope you’ll hold to it,” said Robert, encouragingly.</p>
			<p>Very soon Aunt Linda had an excellent dinner prepared. After it was over Robert went with Iola to C⁠⸺, where her friend, the bishop, was awaiting her return. She told him the wonderful story of Robert’s finding his mother, and of her sweet, childlike faith.</p>
			<p>The bishop, a kind, fatherly man, said, “Miss Iola, I hope that such happiness is in store for you. My dear child, still continue to pray and trust. I am old-fashioned enough to believe in prayer. I knew an old lady living in Illinois, who was a slave. Her son got a chance to come North and beg money to buy his mother. The mother was badly treated, and made up her mind to run away. But before she started she thought she would kneel down to pray. And something, she said, reasoned within her, and whispered, ‘Stand still and see what I am going to do for you.’ So real was it to her that she unpacked her bundle and desisted from her flight. Strange as it may appear to you, her son returned, bringing with him money enough to purchase her freedom, and she was redeemed from bondage. Had she persisted in running away she might have been lost in the woods and have died, exhausted by starvation. But she believed, she trusted, and was delivered. Her son took her North, where she could find a resting place for the soles of her feet.”</p>
			<p>That night Iola and the bishop left for the South.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
