<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX: Eugene Leroy and Alfred Lorraine</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Eugene Leroy and Alfred Lorraine</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Nearly twenty years before the war, two young men, of French and Spanish descent, sat conversing on a large verandah which surrounded an ancient home on the Mississippi River. It was French in its style of architecture, large and rambling, with no hint of modern improvements.</p>
			<p>The owner of the house was the only heir of a Creole planter. He had come into possession of an inheritance consisting of vast baronial estates, bank stock, and a large number of slaves. Eugene Leroy, being deprived of his parents, was left, at an early age, to the care of a distant relative, who had sent him to school and college, and who occasionally invited him to spend his vacations at his home. But Eugene generally declined his invitations, as he preferred spending his vacations at the watering places in the North, with their fashionable and not always innocent gayeties. Young, vivacious, impulsive, and undisciplined, without the restraining influence of a mother’s love or the guidance of a father’s hand, Leroy found himself, when his college days were over, in the dangerous position of a young man with vast possessions, abundant leisure, unsettled principles, and uncontrolled desires. He had no other object than to extract from life its most seductive draughts of ease and pleasure. His companion, who sat opposite him on the verandah, quietly smoking a cigar, was a remote cousin, a few years older than himself, the warmth of whose Southern temperament had been modified by an infusion of Northern blood.</p>
			<p>Eugene was careless, liberal, and impatient of details, while his companion and cousin, Alfred Lorraine, was selfish, eager, keen, and alert; also hard, cold, methodical, and ever ready to grasp the main chance. Yet, notwithstanding the difference between them, they had formed a warm friendship for each other.</p>
			<p>“Alfred,” said Eugene, “I am going to be married.”</p>
			<p>Lorraine opened his eyes with sudden wonder, and exclaimed: “Well, that’s the latest thing out! Who is the fortunate lady who has bound you with her silken fetters? Is it one of those beautiful Creole girls who were visiting Augustine’s plantation last winter? I watched you during our visit there and thought that you could not be proof against their attractions. Which is your choice? It would puzzle me to judge between the two. They had splendid eyes, dark, luminous, and languishing; lovely complexions and magnificent hair. Both were delightful in their manners, refined and cultured, with an air of vivacity mingled with their repose of manner which was perfectly charming. As the law only allows us one, which is your choice? Miss Annette has more force than her sister, and if I could afford the luxury of a wife she would be my choice.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, Alf,” said Eugene, “I see that you are a practical business man. In marrying you want a wife to assist you as an efficient plantation mistress. One who would tolerate no waste in the kitchen and no disorder in the parlor.”</p>
			<p>“Exactly so,” responded Lorraine; “I am too poor to marry a mere parlor ornament. You can afford to do it; I cannot.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense, if I were as poor as a church mouse I would marry the woman I love.”</p>
			<p>“Very fine sentiments,” said Lorraine, “and were I as rich as you I would indulge in them also. You know, when my father died I had great expectations. We had always lived in good style, and I never thought for a moment he was not a rich man, but when his estate was settled I found it was greatly involved, and I was forced to face an uncertain future, with scarcely a dollar to call my own. Land, negroes, cattle, and horses all went under the hammer. The only thing I retained was the education I received at the North; that was my father’s best investment, and all my stock in trade. With that only as an outfit, it would be madness for me to think of marrying one of those lovely girls. They remind me of beautiful canary birds, charming and pretty, but not fitted for the wear and tear of plantation life. Well, which is your choice?”</p>
			<p>“Neither,” replied Eugene.</p>
			<p>“Then, is it that magnificent looking widow from New Orleans, whom we met before you had that terrible spell of sickness and to whom you appeared so devoted?”</p>
			<p>“Not at all. I have not heard from her since that summer. She was fascinating and handsome, but fearfully high strung.”</p>
			<p>“Were you afraid of her?”</p>
			<p>“No; but I valued my happiness too much to trust it in her hands.”</p>
			<p>“Sour grapes!” said Lorraine.</p>
			<p>“No! but I think that slavery and the lack of outside interests are beginning to tell on the lives of our women. They lean too much on their slaves, have too much irresponsible power in their hands, are narrowed and compressed by the routine of plantation life and the lack of intellectual stimulus.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Eugene, when I see what other women are doing in the fields of literature and art, I cannot help thinking an amount of brain power has been held in check among us. Yet I cannot abide those Northern women, with their suffrage views and abolition cant. They just shock me.”</p>
			<p>“But your mother was a Northern woman,” said Eugene.</p>
			<p>“Yes; but she got bravely over her Northern ideas. As I remember her, she was just as much a Southerner as if she had been to the manor born. She came here as a school-teacher, but soon after she came she married my father. He was easy and indulgent with his servants, and held them with a very loose rein. But my mother was firm and energetic. She made the niggers move around. No shirking nor dawdling with her. When my father died, she took matters in hand, but she only outlived him a few months. If she had lived I believe that she would have retrieved our fortune. I know that she had more executive ability than my father. He was very squeamish about selling his servants, but she would have put every one of them in her pocket before permitting them to eat her out of house and home. But whom <em>are</em> you going to marry?”</p>
			<p>“A young lady who graduates from a Northern seminary next week,” responded Eugene.</p>
			<p>“I think you are very selfish,” said Lorraine. “You might have invited a fellow to go with you to be your best man.”</p>
			<p>“The wedding is to be strictly private. The lady whom I am to marry has negro blood in her veins.”</p>
			<p>“The devil she has!” exclaimed Lorraine, starting to his feet, and looking incredulously on the face of Leroy. “Are you in earnest? Surely you must be jesting.”</p>
			<p>“I am certainly in earnest,” answered Eugene Leroy. “I mean every word I say.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it can’t be possible! Are you mad?” exclaimed Lorraine.</p>
			<p>“Never was saner in my life.”</p>
			<p>“What under heaven could have possessed you to do such a foolish thing?<br/>
			Where did she come from.”<br/></p>
			<p>“Right here, on this plantation. But I have educated and manumitted her, and I intend marrying her.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Eugene, it is impossible that you can have an idea of marrying one of your slaves. Why, man, she is your property, to have and to hold to all intents and purposes. Are you not satisfied with the power and possession the law gives you?”</p>
			<p>“No. Although the law makes her helpless in my hands, to me her defenselessness is her best defense.”</p>
			<p>“Eugene, we have known each other all of our lives, and, although I have always regarded you as eccentric, I never saw you so completely off your balance before. The idea of you, with your proud family name, your vast wealth in land and negroes, intending to marry one of them, is a mystery I cannot solve. Do explain to me why you are going to take this extremely strange and foolish step.”</p>
			<p>“You never saw Marie?”</p>
			<p>“No; and I don’t want to.”</p>
			<p>“She is very beautiful. In the North no one would suspect that she has one drop of negro blood in her veins, but here, where I am known, to marry her is to lose caste. I could live with her, and not incur much if any social opprobrium. Society would wink at the transgression, even if after she had become the mother of my children I should cast her off and send her and them to the auction block.”</p>
			<p>“Men,” replied Lorraine, “would merely shrug their shoulders; women would say you had been sowing your wild oats. Your money, like charity, would cover a multitude of faults.”</p>
			<p>“But if I make her my lawful wife and recognize her children as my legitimate heirs, I subject myself to social ostracism and a senseless persecution. We Americans boast of freedom, and yet here is a woman whom I love as I never loved any other human being, but both law and public opinion debar me from following the inclination of my heart. She is beautiful, faithful, and pure, and yet all that society will tolerate is what I would scorn to do.”</p>
			<p>“But has not society the right to guard the purity of its blood by the rigid exclusion of an alien race?”</p>
			<p>“Excluding it! How?” asked Eugene.</p>
			<p>“By debarring it from social intercourse.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps it has,” continued Eugene, “but should not society have a greater ban for those who, by consorting with an alien race, rob their offspring of a right to their names and to an inheritance in their property, and who fix their social status among an enslaved and outcast race? Don’t eye me so curiously; I am not losing my senses.”</p>
			<p>“I think you have done that already,” said Lorraine. “Don’t you know that if she is as fair as a lily, beautiful as a houri, and chaste as ice, that still she is a negro?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, come now; she isn’t much of a negro.”</p>
			<p>“It doesn’t matter, however. One drop of negro blood in her veins curses all the rest.”</p>
			<p>“I know it,” said Eugene, sadly, “but I have weighed the consequences, and am prepared to take them.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Eugene, your course is <em>so</em> singular! I do wish that you would tell me why you take this unprecedented step?”</p>
			<p>Eugene laid aside his cigar, looked thoughtfully at Lorraine, and said, “Well, Alfred, as we are kinsmen and life-long friends, I will not resent your asking my reason for doing that which seems to you the climax of absurdity, and if you will have the patience to listen I will tell you.”</p>
			<p>“Proceed, I am all attention.”</p>
			<p>“My father died,” said Eugene, “as you know, when I was too young to know his loss or feel his care and, being an only child, I was petted and spoiled. I grew up to be wayward, self-indulgent, proud, and imperious. I went from home and made many friends both at college and in foreign lands. I was well supplied with money and, never having been forced to earn it, was ignorant of its value and careless of its use. My lavish expenditures and liberal benefactions attracted to me a number of parasites, and men older than myself led me into the paths of vice, and taught me how to gather the flowers of sin which blossom around the borders of hell. In a word, I left my home unwarned and unarmed against the seductions of vice. I returned an initiated devotee to debasing pleasures. Years of my life were passed in foreign lands; years in which my soul slumbered and seemed pervaded with a moral paralysis; years, the memory of which fills my soul with sorrow and shame. I went to the capitals of the old world to see life, but in seeing life I became acquainted with death, the death of true manliness and self-respect. You look astonished; but I tell you, Alf, there is many a poor clod-hopper, on whom are the dust and grime of unremitting toil, who feels more self-respect and true manliness than many of us with our family prestige, social position, and proud ancestral halls. After I had lived abroad for years, I returned a broken-down young man, prematurely old, my constitution a perfect wreck. A life of folly and dissipation was telling fearfully upon me. My friends shrank from me in dismay. I was sick nigh unto death, and had it not been for Marie’s care I am certain that I should have died. She followed me down to the borders of the grave, and won me back to life and health. I was slow in recovering and, during the time, I had ample space for reflection, and the past unrolled itself before me. I resolved, over the wreck and ruin of my past life, to build a better and brighter future. Marie had a voice of remarkable sweetness, although it lacked culture. Often when I was nervous and restless I would have her sing some of those weird and plaintive melodies which she had learned from the plantation negroes. Sometimes I encouraged her to talk, and I was surprised at the native vigor of her intellect. By degrees I became acquainted with her history. She was all alone in the world. She had no recollection of her father, but remembered being torn from her mother while clinging to her dress. The trader who bought her mother did not wish to buy her. She remembered having a brother, with whom she used to play, but she had been separated from him also, and since then had lost all trace of them. After she was sold from her mother she became the property of an excellent old lady, who seems to have been very careful to imbue her mind with good principles; a woman who loved purity, not only for her own daughters, but also for the defenseless girls in her home. I believe it was the lady’s intention to have freed Marie at her death, but she died suddenly, and, the estate being involved, she was sold with it and fell into the hands of my agent. I became deeply interested in her when I heard her story, and began to pity her.”</p>
			<p>“And I suppose love sprang from pity.”</p>
			<p>“I not only pitied her, but I learned to respect her. I had met with beautiful women in the halls of wealth and fashion, both at home and abroad, but there was something in her different from all my experience of womanhood.”</p>
			<p>“I should think so,” said Lorraine, with a sneer; “but I should like to know what it was.”</p>
			<p>“It was something such as I have seen in old cathedrals, lighting up the beauty of a saintly face. A light which the poet tells was never seen on land or sea. I thought of this beautiful and defenseless girl adrift in the power of a reckless man, who, with all the advantages of wealth and education, had trailed his manhood in the dust, and she, with simple, childlike faith in the Unseen, seemed to be so good and pure that she commanded my respect and won my heart. In her presence every base and unholy passion died, subdued by the supremacy of her virtue.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Eugene, what has come over you? Talking of the virtue of these quadroon girls! You have lived so long in the North and abroad, that you seem to have lost the cue of our Southern life. Don’t you know that these beautiful girls have been the curse of our homes? You have no idea of the hearts which are wrung by their presence.”</p>
			<p>“But, Alfred, suppose it is so. Are they to blame for it? What can any woman do when she is placed in the hands of an irresponsible master; when she knows that resistance is vain? Yes, Alfred, I agree with you, these women are the bane of our Southern civilization; but they are the victims and we are the criminals.”</p>
			<p>“I think from the airs that some of them put on when they get a chance, that they are very willing victims.”</p>
			<p>“So much the worse for our institution. If it is cruel to debase a hapless victim, it is an increase of cruelty to make her contented with her degradation. Let me tell you, Alf, you cannot wrong or degrade a woman without wronging or degrading yourself.”</p>
			<p>“What is the matter with you, Eugene? Are you thinking of taking priest’s orders?”</p>
			<p>“No, Alf,” said Eugene, rising and rapidly pacing the floor, “you may defend the system as much as you please, but you cannot deny that the circumstances it creates, and the temptations it affords, are sapping our strength and undermining our character.”</p>
			<p>“That may be true,” said Lorraine, somewhat irritably, “but you had better be careful how you air your Northern notions in public.”</p>
			<p>“Why so?”</p>
			<p>“Because public opinion is too sensitive to tolerate any such discussions.”</p>
			<p>“And is not that a proof that we are at fault with respect to our institutions?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. I only know we are living in the midst of a magazine of powder, and it is not safe to enter it with a lighted candle.”</p>
			<p>“Let me proceed with my story,” continued Eugene. “During the long months in which I was convalescing, I was left almost entirely to the companionship of Marie. In my library I found a Bible, which I began to read from curiosity, but my curiosity deepened into interest when I saw the rapt expression on Marie’s face. I saw in it a loving response to sentiments to which I was a stranger. In the meantime my conscience was awakened, and I scorned to take advantage of her defenselessness. I felt that I owed my life to her faithful care, and I resolved to take her North, manumit, educate, and marry her. I sent her to a Northern academy, but as soon as some of the pupils found that she was colored, objections were raised, and the principal was compelled to dismiss her. During my search for a school I heard of one where three girls of mixed blood were pursuing their studies, every one of whom would have been ignominiously dismissed had their connection with the negro race been known. But I determined to run no risks. I found a school where her connection with the negro race would be no bar to her advancement. She graduates next week, and I intend to marry her before I return home. She was faithful when others were faithless, stood by me when others deserted me to die in loneliness and neglect, and now I am about to reward her care with all the love and devotion it is in my power to bestow. That is why I am about to marry my faithful and devoted nurse, who snatched me from the jaws of death. Now that I have told you my story, what say you?”</p>
			<p>“Madness and folly inconceivable!” exclaimed Lorraine.</p>
			<p>“What to you is madness and folly is perfect sanity with me. After all,<br/>
			Alf, is there not an amount of unreason in our prejudices?”<br/></p>
			<p>“That may be true; but I wasn’t reasoned into it, and I do not expect to be reasoned out of it.”</p>
			<p>“Will you accompany me North?”</p>
			<p>“No; except to put you in an insane asylum. You are the greatest crank out,” said Lorraine, thoroughly disgusted.</p>
			<p>“No, thank you; I’m all right. I expect to start North to-morrow. You had better come and go.”</p>
			<p>“I would rather follow you to your grave,” replied Lorraine, hotly, while an expression of ineffable scorn passed over his cold, proud face.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
