<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII: Dr. Latrobe’s Mistake</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe’s Mistake</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On the morning previous to their departure for their respective homes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gresham met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe in the parlor of the Concordia.</p>
			<p>“How,” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gresham, “did you like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer’s paper?”</p>
			<p>“Very much, indeed. It was excellent. He is a very talented young man. He sits next to me at lunch and I have conversed with him several times. He is very genial and attractive, only he seems to be rather cranky on the negro question. I hope if he comes South that he will not make the mistake of mixing up with the negroes. It would be throwing away his influence and ruining his prospects. He seems to be well versed in science and literature and would make a very delightful accession to our social life.”</p>
			<p>“I think,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gresham, “that he is an honor to our profession. He is one of the finest specimens of our young manhood.”</p>
			<p>Just then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer entered the room. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe arose and, greeting him cordially, said: “I was delighted with your paper; it was full of thought and suggestion.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” answered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer, “it was my aim to make it so.”</p>
			<p>“And you succeeded admirably,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe. “I could not help thinking how much we owe to heredity and environment.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gresham. “Continental Europe yearly sends to our shores subjects to be developed into citizens. Emancipation has given us millions of new citizens, and to them our influence and example should be a blessing and not a curse.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer, “I intend to go South, and help those who so much need helpers from their own ranks.”</p>
			<p>“I hope,” answered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe, “that if you go South you will only sustain business relations with the negroes, and not commit the folly of equalizing yourself with them.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer, steadily looking him in the eye.</p>
			<p>“Because in equalizing yourself with them you drag us down; and our social customs must be kept intact.”</p>
			<p>“You have been associating with me at the convention for several days; I do not see that the contact has dragged you down, has it?”</p>
			<p>“You! What has that got to do with associating with niggers?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe, curtly.</p>
			<p>“The blood of that race is coursing through my veins. I am one of them,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer, proudly raising his head.</p>
			<p>“You!” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe, with an air of profound astonishment and crimsoning face.</p>
			<p>“Yes;” interposed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gresham, laughing heartily at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe’s discomfiture. “He belongs to that negro race both by blood and choice. His father’s mother made overtures to receive him as her grandson and heir, but he has nobly refused to forsake his mother’s people and has cast his lot with them.”</p>
			<p>“And I,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer, “would have despised myself if I had done otherwise.”</p>
			<p>“Well, well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe, rising, “I was never so deceived before. Good morning!”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe had thought he was clear-sighted enough to detect the presence of negro blood when all physical traces had disappeared. But he had associated with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer for several days, and admired his talent, without suspecting for one moment his racial connection. He could not help feeling a sense of vexation at the signal mistake he had made.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Frank Latimer was the natural grandson of a Southern lady, in whose family his mother had been a slave. The blood of a proud aristocratic ancestry was flowing through his veins, and generations of blood admixture had effaced all trace of his negro lineage. His complexion was blonde, his eye bright and piercing, his lips firm and well moulded; his manner very affable; his intellect active and well stored with information. He was a man capable of winning in life through his rich gifts of inheritance and acquirements. When freedom came, his mother, like Hagar of old, went out into the wide world to seek a living for herself and child. Through years of poverty she labored to educate her child, and saw the glad fruition of her hopes when her son graduated as an <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.D.</abbr> from the University of P⁠⸺.</p>
			<p>After his graduation he met his father’s mother, who recognized him by his resemblance to her dear, departed son. All the mother love in her lonely heart awoke, and she was willing to overlook “the missing link of matrimony,” and adopt him as her heir, if he would ignore his identity with the colored race.</p>
			<p>Before him loomed all the possibilities which only birth and blood can give a white man in our Democratic country. But he was a man of too much sterling worth of character to be willing to forsake his mother’s race for the richest advantages his grandmother could bestow.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gresham had met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latimer at the beginning of the convention, and had been attracted to him by his frank and genial manner. One morning, when conversing with him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gresham had learned some of the salient points of his history, which, instead of repelling him, had only deepened his admiration for the young doctor. He was much amused when he saw the pleasant acquaintanceship between him and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Latrobe, but they agreed to be silent about his racial connection until the time came when they were ready to divulge it; and they were hugely delighted at his signal blunder.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
