<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>III</h2>
			<h3>Uncle Daniel’s Story</h3>
			<p>The Union had snapped asunder because it lacked the cohesion of justice, and the Nation was destined to pass through the crucible of disaster and defeat, till she was ready to clasp hands with the negro and march abreast with him to freedom and victory.</p>
			<p>The Union army was encamping a few miles from C⁠⸺, in North Carolina. Robert, being well posted on the condition of affairs, had stealthily contrived to call a meeting in Uncle Daniel’s cabin. Uncle Daniel’s wife had gone to bed as a sick sister, and they held a prayer-meeting by her bedside. It was a little risky, but as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thurston did not encourage the visits of the patrollers, and heartily detested having them prying into his cabins, there was not much danger of molestation.</p>
			<p>“Well, Uncle Daniel, we want to hear your story, and see if you have made up your mind to go with us,” said Robert, after he had been seated a few minutes in Uncle Daniel’s cabin.</p>
			<p>“No, chillen, I’ve no objection to finishin’ my story, but I ain’t made up my mind to leave the place till Marse Robert gits back.”</p>
			<p>“You were telling us about Marse Robert’s mother. How did you get along after she died?”</p>
			<p>“Arter she war gone, ole Marster’s folks come to look arter things. But eberything war lef’ to Marse Robert, an’ he wouldn’t do widout me. Dat chile war allers at my heels. I couldn’t stir widout him, an’ when he missed me, he’d fret an’ cry so I had ter stay wid him; an’ wen he went to school, I had ter carry him in de mornin’ and bring him home in de ebenin’. An’ I learned him to hunt squirrels, an’ rabbits, an’ ketch fish, an’ set traps for birds. I beliebs he lob’d me better dan any ob his kin’. An’ he showed me how to read.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Tom, “ef he lob’d you so much, why didn’t he set you free?”</p>
			<p>“Marse Robert tole me, ef he died fust he war gwine ter leave me free⁠—dat I should neber sarve any one else.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, sho!” said Tom, “promises, like pie crusts, is made to be broken. I don’t trust none ob dem. I’se been yere dese fifteen years, an’ I’se neber foun’ any troof in dem. An’ I’se gwine wid dem North men soon’s I gits a chance. An’ ef you knowed what’s good fer you, you’d go, too.”</p>
			<p>“No, Tom; I can’t go. When Marster Robert went to de front, he called me to him an’ said: ‘Uncle Daniel,’ an’ he was drefful pale when he said it, ‘I are gwine to de war, an’ I want yer to take keer of my wife an’ chillen, jis’ like yer used to take keer of me wen yer called me your little boy.’ Well, dat jis’ got to me, an’ I couldn’t help cryin’, to save my life.”</p>
			<p>“I specs,” said Tom, “your tear bags must lie mighty close to your eyes. I wouldn’t cry ef dem Yankees would make ebery one ob dem go to de front, an’ stay dere foreber. Dey’d only be gittin’ back what dey’s been a doin’ to us.”</p>
			<p>“Marster Robert war nebber bad to me. An’ I beliebs in stannin’ by dem dat stans by you. Arter Miss Anna died, I had great ’sponsibilities on my shoulders; but I war orful lonesome, an’ thought I’d like to git a wife. But dere warn’t a gal on de plantation, an’ nowhere’s roun’, dat filled de bill. So I jis’ waited, an’ ’tended to Marse Robert till he war ole ’nough to go to college. Wen he went, he allers ’membered me in de letters he used to write his grandma. Wen he war gone, I war lonesomer dan eber. But, one day, I jis’ seed de gal dat took de rag off de bush. Gundover had jis’ brought her from de up-country. She war putty as a picture!” he exclaimed, looking fondly at his wife, who still bore traces of great beauty. “She had putty hair, putty eyes, putty mouth. She war putty all over; an’ she know’d how to put on style.”</p>
			<p>“O, Daniel,” said Aunt Katie, half chidingly, “how you do talk.”</p>
			<p>“Why, it’s true. I ’member when you war de puttiest gal in dese diggins; when nobody could top your cotton.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t,” said Aunt Katie.</p>
			<p>“Well, I do. Now, let me go on wid my story. De fust time I seed her, I sez to myself, ‘Dat’s de gal for me, an’ I means to hab her ef I kin git her.’ So I scraped ‘quaintance wid her, and axed her ef she would hab me ef our marsters would let us. I warn’t ’fraid ’bout Marse Robert, but I warn’t quite shore ’bout Gundover. So when Marse Robert com’d home, I axed him, an’ he larf’d an’ said, ‘All right,’ an’ dat he would speak to ole Gundover ’bout it. He didn’t relish it bery much, but he didn’t like to ’fuse Marse Robert. He wouldn’t sell her, for she tended his dairy, an’ war mighty handy ’bout de house. He said, I mought marry her an’ come to see her wheneber Marse Robert would gib me a pass. I wanted him to sell her, but he wouldn’t hear to it, so I had to put up wid what I could git. Marse Robert war mighty good to me, but ole Gundover’s wife war de meanest woman dat I eber did see. She used to go out on de plantation an’ boss things like a man. Arter I war married, I had a baby. It war de dearest, cutest little thing you eber did see; but, pore thing, it got sick and died. It died ’bout three o’clock; and in de mornin’, Katie, habbin her cows to milk, lef her dead baby in de cabin. When she com’d back from milkin’ her thirty cows, an’ went to look for her pore little baby, some one had been to her cabin an’ took’d de pore chile away an’ put it in de groun’. Pore Katie, she didn’t eben hab a chance to kiss her baby ’fore it war buried. Ole Gundover’s wife has been dead thirty years, an’ she didn’t die a day too soon. An’ my little baby has gone to glory, an’ is wingin’ wid the angels an’ a lookin’ out for us. One ob de las’ things ole Gundover’s wife did ’fore she died war to order a woman whipped ’cause she com’d to de field a little late when her husband war sick, an’ she had stopped to tend him. Dat mornin’ she war taken sick wid de fever, an’ in a few days she war gone out like de snuff ob a candle. She lef’ several sons, an’ I specs she would almos’ turn ober in her grave ef she know’d she had ten culled granchillen somewhar down in de lower kentry.”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t it funny,” said Robert, “how these white folks look down on colored people, an’ then mix up with them?”</p>
			<p>“Marster war away when Miss ’Liza treated my Katie so mean, an’ when I tole him ’bout it, he war tearin’ mad, an’ went ober an’ saw ole Gundover, an’ foun’ out he war hard up for money, an’ he bought Katie and brought her home to lib wid me, and we’s been a libin in clover eber sence. Marster Robert has been mighty good to me. He stood by me in my troubles, an’ now his trouble’s come, I’m a gwine to stan’ by him. I used to think Gundover’s wife war jealous ob my Katie. She war so much puttier. Gundover’s wife couldn’t tech my Katie wid a ten foot pole.”</p>
			<p>“But, Aunt Katie, you have had your trials,” said Robert, now that Daniel had finished his story; “don’t you feel bitter towards these people who are fighting to keep you in slavery?”</p>
			<p>Aunt Katie turned her face towards the speaker. It was a thoughtful, intelligent face, saintly and calm. A face which expressed the idea of a soul which had been fearfully tempest tossed, but had passed through suffering into peace. Very touching was the look of resignation and hope which overspread her features as she replied, with the simple child-like faith which she had learned in the darkest hour, “The Lord says, we must forgive.” And with her that thought, as coming from the lips of Divine Love, was enough to settle the whole question of forgiveness of injuries and love to enemies.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Thomas Anderson, turning to Uncle Daniel, “we can’t count on yer to go wid us?”</p>
			<p>“Boys,” said Uncle Daniel, and there was grief in his voice, “I’se mighty glad you hab a chance for your freedom; but, ez I tole yer, I promised Marse Robert I would stay, an’ I mus’ be as good as my word. Don’t you youngsters stay for an ole stager like me. I’m ole an’ mos’ worn out. Freedom wouldn’t do much for me, but I want you all to be as free as the birds; so, you chillen, take your freedom when you kin get it.”</p>
			<p>“But, Uncle Dan’el, you won’t say nothin’ ’bout our going, will you?” said the youngest of the company.</p>
			<p>Uncle Daniel slowly arose. There was a mournful flash in his eye, a tremor of emotion in his voice, as he said, “Look yere, boys, de boy dat axed dat question war a new comer on dis plantation, but some ob you’s bin here all ob your lives; did you eber know ob Uncle Dan’el gittin’ any ob you inter trouble?”</p>
			<p>“No, no,” exclaimed a chorus of voices, “but many’s de time you’ve held off de blows wen de oberseer got too mean, an’ cruelized us too much, wen Marse Robert war away. An’ wen he got back, you made him settle de oberseer’s hash.”</p>
			<p>“Well, boys,” said Uncle Daniel, with an air of mournful dignity, “I’se de same Uncle Dan’el I eber war. Ef any ob you wants to go, I habben’t a word to say agin it. I specs dem Yankees be all right, but I knows Marse Robert, an’ I don’t know dem, an’ I ain’t a gwine ter throw away dirty water ’til I gits clean.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Uncle Ben,” said Robert, addressing a stalwart man whose towering form and darkly flashing eye told that slavery had failed to put the crouch in his shoulders or general abjectness into his demeanor, “you will go with us, for sure, won’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” spoke up Tom Anderson, “ ’cause de trader’s done took your wife, an’ got her for his’n now.”</p>
			<p>As Ben Tunnel looked at the speaker, a spasm of agony and anger darkened his face and distorted his features, as if the blood of some strong race were stirring with sudden vigor through his veins. He clutched his hands together, as if he were struggling with an invisible foe, and for a moment he remained silent. Then suddenly raising his head, he exclaimed, “Boys, there’s not one of you loves freedom more than I do, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But what?” said Tom. “Do you think white folks is your bes’ friends?”</p>
			<p>“I’ll think so when I lose my senses.”</p>
			<p>“Well, now, I don’t belieb you’re ’fraid, not de way I yeard you talkin’ to de oberseer wen he war threatnin’ to hit your mudder. He saw you meant business, an’ he let her alone. But, what’s to hinder you from gwine wid us?”</p>
			<p>“My mother,” he replied, in a low, firm voice. “That is the only thing that keeps me from going. If it had not been for her, I would have gone long ago. She’s all I’ve got, an’ I’m all she’s got.”</p>
			<p>It was touching to see the sorrow on the strong face, to detect the pathos and indignation in his voice, as he said, “I used to love Mirandy as I love my life. I thought the sun rose and set in her. I never saw a handsomer woman than she was. But she fooled me all over the face and eyes, and took up with that hell-hound of a trader, Lukens; an’ he gave her a chance to live easy, to wear fine clothes, an’ be waited on like a lady. I thought at first I would go crazy, but my poor mammy did all she could to comfort me. She would tell me there were as good fish in the sea as were ever caught out of it. Many a time I’ve laid my poor head on her lap, when it seemed as if my brain was on fire and my heart was almost ready to burst. But in course of time I got over the worst of it; an’ Mirandy is the first an’ last woman that ever fooled me. But that dear old mammy of mine, I mean to stick by her as long as there is a piece of her. I can’t go over to the army an’ leave her behind, for if I did, an’ anything should happen, I would never forgive myself.”</p>
			<p>“But couldn’t you take her with you,” said Robert, “the soldiers said we could bring our women.”</p>
			<p>“It isn’t that. The Union army is several miles from here, an’ my poor mammy is so skeery that, if I were trying to get her away and any of them Secesh would overtake us, an’ begin to question us, she would get skeered almost to death, an’ break down an’ begin to cry, an’ then the fat would be in the fire. So, while I love freedom more than a child loves its mother’s milk, I’ve made up my mind to stay on the plantation. I wish, from the bottom of my heart, I could go. But I can’t take her along with me, an’ I don’t want to be free and leave her behind in slavery. I was only five years old when my master and, as I believe, father, sold us both here to this lower country, an’ we’ve been here ever since. It’s no use talking, I won’t leave her to be run over by everybody.”</p>
			<p>A few evenings after this interview, the Union soldiers entered the town of C⁠⸺, and established their headquarters near the home of Thomas Anderson.</p>
			<p>Out of the little company, almost every one deserted to the Union army, leaving Uncle Daniel faithful to his trust, and Ben Tunnel hushing his heart’s deep aspirations for freedom in a passionate devotion to his timid and affectionate mother.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
