<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XVIII</h2>
			<h3>Searching for Lost Ones</h3>
			<p>To bind anew the ties which slavery had broken and gather together the remnants of his scattered family became the earnest purpose of Robert’s life. Iola, hopeful that in Robert she had found her mother’s brother, was glad to know she was not alone in <i>her</i> search. Having sent out lines of inquiry in different directions, she was led to hope, from some of the replies she had received, that her mother was living somewhere in Georgia.</p>
			<p>Hearing that a Methodist conference was to convene in that State, and being acquainted with the bishop of that district, she made arrangements to accompany him thither. She hoped to gather some tidings of her mother through the ministers gathered from different parts of that State.</p>
			<p>From her brother she had heard nothing since her father’s death. On his way to the conference, the bishop had an engagement to dedicate a church, near the city of C⁠⸺, in North Carolina. Iola was quite willing to stop there a few days, hoping to hear something of Robert Johnson’s mother. Soon after she had seated herself in the cars she was approached by a gentleman, who reached out his hand to her, and greeted her with great cordiality. Iola looked up, and recognized him immediately as one of her last patients at the hospital. It was none other than Robert Johnson.</p>
			<p>“I am so glad to meet you,” he said. “I am on my way to C⁠⸺ in search of my mother. I want to see the person who sold her last, and, if possible, get some clew to the direction in which she went.”</p>
			<p>“And I,” said Iola, “am in search of <i>my</i> mother. I am convinced that when we find those for whom we are searching they will prove to be very nearly related. Mamma said, before we were parted, that her brother had a red spot on his temple. If I could see that spot I should rest assured that my mother is your sister.”</p>
			<p>“Then,” said Robert, “I can give you that assurance,” and smilingly he lifted his hair from his temple, on which was a large, red spot.</p>
			<p>“I am satisfied,” exclaimed Iola, fixing her eyes, beaming with hope and confidence, on Robert. “Oh, I am so glad that I can, without the least hesitation, accept your services to join with me in the further search. What are your plans?”</p>
			<p>“To stop for awhile in C⁠⸺,” said Robert, “and gather all the information possible from those who sold and bought my mother. I intend to leave no stone un-turned in searching for her.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I <i>do</i> hope that you will succeed. I expect to stop over there a few days, and I shall be so glad if, before I leave, I hear your search has been crowned with success, or, a least, that you have been put on the right track. Although I was born and raised in the midst of slavery, I had not the least idea of its barbarous selfishness till I was forced to pass through it. But we lived so much alone I had no opportunity to study it, except on our own plantation. My father and mother were very kind to their slaves. But it was slavery, all the same, and I hate it, root and branch.”</p>
			<p>Just then the conductor called out the station.</p>
			<p>“We stop here,” said Robert. “I am going to see Mrs. Johnson, and hunt up some of my old acquaintances. Where do you stop?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” replied Iola. “I expect that friends will be here to meet us. Bishop B⁠⸺, permit me to introduce you to Mr. Robert Johnson, whom I have every reason to believe is my mother’s brother. Like myself, he is engaged in hunting up his lost relatives.”</p>
			<p>“And I,” said Robert, “am very much pleased to know that we are not without favorable clues.”</p>
			<p>“Bishop,” said Iola, “Mr. Johnson wishes to know where I am to stop. He is going on an exploring expedition, and wishes to let me know the result.”</p>
			<p>“We stop at Mrs. Allston’s, 313 New Street,” said the bishop. “If I can be of any use to you, I am at your service.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” said Robert, lifting his hat, as he left them to pursue his inquiries about his long-lost mother.</p>
			<p>Quickly he trod the old familiar streets which led to his former home. He found Mrs. Johnson, but she had aged very fast since the war. She was no longer the lithe, active woman, with her proud manner and resolute bearing. Her eye had lost its brightness, her step its elasticity, and her whole appearance indicated that she was slowly sinking beneath a weight of sorrow which was heavier far than her weight of years. When she heard that Robert had called to see her she was going to receive him in the hall, as she would have done any of her former slaves, but her mind immediately changed when she saw him. He was not the light-hearted, careless, mischief-loving Robby of former days, but a handsome man, with heavy moustache, dark, earnest eyes, and proud military bearing. He smiled, and reached out his hand to her. She hardly knew how to address him. To her colored people were either boys and girls, or “aunties and uncles.” She had never in her life addressed a colored person as “Mr. or Mrs.” To do so now was to violate the social customs of the place. It would be like learning a new language in her old age. Robert immediately set her at ease by addressing her under the old familiar name of “Miss Nancy.” This immediately relieved her of all embarrassment. She invited him into the sitting-room, and gave him a warm welcome.</p>
			<p>“Well, Robby,” she said, “I once thought that you would have been the last one to leave me. You know I never ill-treated you, and I gave you everything you needed. People said that I was spoiling you. I thought you were as happy as the days were long. When I heard of other people’s servants leaving them I used to say to myself, ‘I can trust my Bobby; he will stick to me to the last.’ But I fooled myself that time. Soon as the Yankee soldiers got in sight you left me without saying a word. That morning I came down into the kitchen and asked Linda, ‘Where’s Robert? Why hasn’t he set the table?’ She said ‘she hadn’t seen you since the night before.’ I thought maybe you were sick, and I went to see, but you were not in your room. I couldn’t believe at first that you were gone. Wasn’t I always good to you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Miss Nancy,” replied Robert; “you were good, but freedom was better.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she said, musingly, “I suppose I would have done the same. But, Robby, it did go hard with me at first. However, I soon found out that my neighbors had been going through the same thing. But its all over now. Let by-gones be by-gones. What are you doing now, and where are you living?”</p>
			<p>“I am living in the city of P⁠⸺. I have opened a hardware store there.<br/>
			But just now I am in search of my mother and sister.”<br/></p>
			<p>“I hope that you may find them.”</p>
			<p>“How long,” asked Robert, “do you think it has been since they left here?”</p>
			<p>“Let me see; it must have been nearly thirty years. You got my letter?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, ma’am; thank you.”</p>
			<p>“There have been great changes since you left here,” Mrs. Johnson said. “Gundover died, and a number of colored men have banded together, bought his plantation, and divided it among themselves. And I hear they have a very nice settlement out there. I hope, since the Government has set them free, that they will succeed.”</p>
			<p>After Robert’s interview with Mrs. Johnson he thought he would visit the settlement and hunt up his old friends. He easily found the place. It was on a clearing in Gundover’s woods, where Robert and Uncle Daniel had held their last prayer-meeting. Now the gloomy silence of those woods was broken by the hum of industry, the murmur of cheerful voices, and the merry laughter of happy children. Where they had trodden with fear and misgiving, freedmen walked with light and bounding hearts. The school-house had taken the place of the slave-pen and auction-block. “How is yer, ole boy?” asked one laborer of another.</p>
			<p>“Everything is lobly,” replied the other. The blue sky arching overhead and the beauty of the scenery justified the expression.</p>
			<p>Gundover had died soon after the surrender. Frank Anderson had grown reckless and drank himself to death. His brother Tom had been killed in battle. Their mother, who was Gundover’s daughter, had died insane. Their father had also passed away. The defeat of the Confederates, the loss of his sons, and the emancipation of his slaves, were blows from which he never recovered. As Robert passed leisurely along, delighted with the evidences of thrift and industry which constantly met his eye, he stopped to admire a garden filled with beautiful flowers, clambering vines, and rustic adornments.</p>
			<p>On the porch sat an elderly woman, darning stockings, the very embodiment of content and good humor. Robert looked inquiringly at her. On seeing him, she almost immediately exclaimed, “Shore as I’se born, dat’s Robert! Look yere, honey, whar did yer come from? I’ll gib my head fer a choppin’ block ef dat ain’t Miss Nancy’s Bob. Ain’t yer our Bobby? Shore yer is.”</p>
			<p>“Of course I am,” responded Robert. “It isn’t anybody else. How did you know me?”</p>
			<p>“How did I know yer? By dem mischeebous eyes, ob course. I’d a knowed yer if I had seed yer in Europe.”</p>
			<p>“In Europe, Aunt Linda? Where’s that?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. I specs its some big city, somewhar. But yer looks jis’ splendid. Yer looks good ’nuff ter kiss.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Aunt Linda, don’t say that. You make me blush.”</p>
			<p>“Oh you go ’long wid yer. I specs yer’s got a nice little wife up dar whar yer comes from, dat kisses yer ebery day, an’ Sunday, too.”</p>
			<p>“Is that the way your old man does you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, not a bit. He isn’t one ob de kissin’ kine. But sit down,” she said, handing Robert a chair. “Won’t yer hab a glass ob milk? Boy, I’se a libin’ in clover. Neber ’spected ter see sich good times in all my born days.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Aunt Linda,” said Robert, seating himself near her, and drinking the glass of milk which she had handed him, “how goes the battle? How have you been getting on since freedom?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, fust rate, fust rate! Wen freedom com’d I jist lit out ob Miss Johnson’s kitchen soon as I could. I wanted ter re’lize I war free, an’ I couldn’t, tell I got out er de sight and soun’ ob ole Miss. When de war war ober an’ de sogers war still stopping’ yere, I made pies an’ cakes, sole em to de sogers, an’ jist made money han’ ober fist. An’ I kep’ on a workin’ an’ a savin’ till my ole man got back from de war wid his wages and his bounty money. I felt right set up an’ mighty big wen we counted all dat money. We had neber seen so much money in our lives befo’, let alone hab it fer ourselbs. An’ I sez, ‘John, you take dis money an’ git a nice place wid it.’ An’ he sez, ‘Dere’s no use tryin’, kase dey don’t want ter sell us any lan’.’ Ole Gundover said, ’fore he died, dat he would let de lan’ grow up in trees ’fore he’d sell it to us. An’ dere war Mr. Brayton; he buyed some lan’ and sole it to some cullud folks, an’ his ole frien’s got so mad wid him dat dey wouldn’t speak ter him, an’ he war borned down yere. I tole ole Miss Anderson’s daughter dat we wanted ter git some homes ob our ownselbs. She sez, ‘Den you won’t want ter work for us?’ Jis’ de same as ef we could eat an’ drink our houses. I tell yer, Robby, dese white folks don’t know eberything.”</p>
			<p>“That’s a fact, Aunt Linda.”</p>
			<p>“Den I sez ter John, ‘wen one door shuts anoder opens.’ An’ shore ’nough, ole Gundover died, an’ his place war all in debt, an’ had to be sole. Some Jews bought it, but dey didn’t want to farm it, so dey gib us a chance to buy it. Dem Jews hez been right helpful to cullud people wen dey hab lan’ to sell. I reckon dey don’t keer who buys it so long as dey gits de money. Well, John didn’t gib in at fust; didn’t want to let on his wife knowed more dan he did, an’ dat he war ruled ober by a woman. Yer know he is an’ ole Firginian, an’ some ob dem ole Firginians do so lub to rule a woman. But I kep’ naggin at him, till I specs he got tired of my tongue, an’ he went and buyed dis piece ob lan’. Dis house war on it, an’ war all gwine to wrack. It used to belong to John’s ole marster. His wife died right in dis house, an’ arter dat her husband went right to de dorgs; an’ now he’s in de pore-house. My! but ain’t dem tables turned. When we knowed it war our own, warn’t my ole man proud! I seed it in him, but he wouldn’t let on. Ain’t you men powerful ’ceitful?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Aunt Linda, don’t put me in with the rest!”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know ’bout dat. Put you all in de bag for ’ceitfulness, an’ I don’t know which would git out fust.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Aunt Linda, I suppose by this time you know how to read and write?”</p>
			<p>“No, chile, sence freedom’s com’d I’se bin scratchin’ too hard to get a libin’ to put my head down to de book.”</p>
			<p>“But, Aunt Linda, it would be such company when your husband is away, to take a book. Do you never get lonesome?”</p>
			<p>“Chile, I ain’t got no time ter get lonesome. Ef you had eber so many chickens to feed, an’ pigs squealin’ fer somethin’ ter eat, an’ yore ducks an’ geese squakin’ ’roun’ yer, yer wouldn’t hab time ter git lonesome.”</p>
			<p>“But, Aunt Linda, you might be sick for months, and think what a comfort it would be if you could read your Bible.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I could hab prayin’ and singin’. Dese people is mighty good ’bout prayin’ by de sick. Why, Robby, I think it would gib me de hysterics ef I war to try to git book larnin’ froo my pore ole head. How long is yer gwine to stay? An’ whar is yer stoppin?”</p>
			<p>“I got here to-day,” said Robert, “but I expect to stay several days.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I wants yer to meet my ole man, an’ talk ’bout ole times.<br/>
			Couldn’t yer come an’ stop wid me, or isn’t my house sniptious ’nuff?”<br/></p>
			<p>“Yes, thank you; but there is a young lady in town whom I think is my niece, my sister’s daughter, and I want to be with her all I can.”</p>
			<p>“Your niece! Whar did you git any niece from?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you remember,” asked Robert, “that my mother had a little daughter, when Mrs. Johnson sold her? Well, I believe this young lady is that daughter’s child.”</p>
			<p>“Laws a marcy!” exclaimed Aunt Linda, “yer don’t tell me so! Whar did yer ketch up wid her?”</p>
			<p>“I met her first,” said Robert, “at the hospital here, when our poor Tom was dying; and when I was wounded at Five Forks she attended me in the field hospital there. She was just as good as gold.”</p>
			<p>“Well, did I eber! You jis’ fotch dat chile to see me, ef she ain’t too fine. I’se pore, but I’se clean, an’ I ain’t forgot how ter git up good dinners. Now, I wants ter hab a good talk ’bout our feller-sarvants.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and I,” said Robert, “want to hear all about Uncle Daniel, and<br/>
			Jennie, and Uncle Ben Tunnel.”<br/></p>
			<p>“Well, I’se got lots an’ gobs ter tell yer. I’se kep’ track ob dem all. Aunt Katie died an’ went ter hebben in a blaze ob glory. Uncle Dan’el stayed on de place till Marse Robert com’d back. When de war war ober he war smashed all ter pieces. I did pity him from de bottom ob my heart. When he went ter de war he looked so brave an’ han’some; an’ wen he com’d back he looked orful. ’Fore he went he gib Uncle Dan’el a bag full ob money ter take kere ob. ’An wen he com’d back Uncle Dan’el gibed him ebery cent ob it. It warn’t ebery white pusson he could hab trusted wid it. ’Cause yer know, Bobby, money’s a mighty temptin’ thing. Dey tells me dat Marster Robert los’ a heap ob property by de war; but Marse Robert war always mighty good ter Uncle Dan’el and Aunt Katie. He war wid her wen she war dyin’ an’ she got holt his han’ an’ made him promise dat he would meet her in glory. I neber seed anybody so happy in my life. She singed an’ prayed ter de last. I tell you dis ole time religion is good ’nuff fer me. Mr. Robert didn’t stay yere long arter her, but I beliebs he went all right. But ’fore he went he looked out fer Uncle Dan’el. Did you see dat nice little cabin down dere wid de green shutters an’ nice little garden in front? Well, ’fore Marse Robert died he gib Uncle Dan’el dat place, an’ Miss Mary and de chillen looks arter him yet; an’ he libs jis’ as snug as a bug in a rug. I’se gwine ter axe him ter take supper wid you. He’ll be powerful glad ter see you.”</p>
			<p>“Do you ever go to see old Miss?” asked Robert.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes; I goes ebery now and den. But she’s jis’ fell froo. Ole Johnson jis’ drunk hisself to death. He war de biggest guzzler I eber seed in my life. Why, dat man he drunk up ebery thing he could lay his han’s on. Sometimes he would go ’roun’ tryin’ to borrer money from pore cullud folks. ’Twas rale drefful de way dat pore feller did frow hisself away. But drink did it all. I tell you, Bobby, dat drink’s a drefful thing wen it gits de upper han’ ob you. You’d better steer clar ob it.”</p>
			<p>“That’s so,” assented Robert.</p>
			<p>“I know’d Miss Nancy’s fadder and mudder. Dey war mighty rich. Some ob de real big bugs. Marse Jim used to know dem, an’ come ober ter de plantation, an’ eat an’ drink wen he got ready, an’ stay as long as he choose. Ole Cousins used to have wine at dere table ebery day, an’ Marse Jim war mighty fon’ ob dat wine, an’ sometimes he would drink till he got quite boozy. Ole Cousins liked him bery well, till he foun’ out he wanted his darter, an’ den he didn’t want him fer rags nor patches. But Miss Nancy war mighty headstrong, an’ allers liked to hab her own way; an’ dis time she got it. But didn’t she step her foot inter it? Ole Johnson war mighty han’some, but when dat war said all war said. She run’d off an’ got married, but wen she got down she war too spunkey to axe her pa for anything. Wen you war wid her, yer know she only took big bugs. But wen de war com’d ’roun’ it tore her all ter pieces, an’ now she’s as pore as Job’s turkey. I feel’s right sorry fer her. Well, Robby, things is turned ’roun’ mighty quare. Ole Mistus war up den, an’ I war down; now, she’s down, an’ I’se up. But I pities her, ’cause she warn’t so bad arter all. De wuss thing she eber did war ta sell your mudder, an’ she wouldn’t hab done dat but she snatched de whip out ob her han’ an gib her a lickin’. Now I belieb in my heart she war ’fraid ob your mudder arter dat. But we women had ter keep ’em from whippin’ us, er dey’d all de time been libin’ on our bones. She had no man ter whip us ’cept dat ole drunken husband ob hern, an’ he war allers too drunk ter whip hisself. He jis’ wandered off, an’ I reckon he died in somebody’s pore-house. He warn’t no ’count nohow you fix it. Weneber I goes to town I carries her some garden sass, er a little milk an’ butter. An’ she’s mighty glad ter git it. I ain’t got nothin’ agin her. She neber struck me a lick in her life, an’ I belieb in praising de bridge dat carries me ober. Dem Yankees set me free, an’ I thinks a powerful heap ob dem. But it does rile me ter see dese mean white men comin’ down yere an’ settin’ up dere grog-shops, tryin’ to fedder dere nests sellin’ licker to pore culled people. Deys de bery kine ob men dat used ter keep dorgs to ketch de runaways. I’d be chokin’ fer a drink ’fore I’d eber spen’ a cent wid dem, a spreadin’ dere traps to git de black folks’ money. You jis’ go down town ’fore sun up to-morrer mornin’ an’ you see ef dey don’t hab dem bars open to sell dere drams to dem hard workin’ culled people ’fore dey goes ter work. I thinks some niggers is mighty big fools.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Aunt Linda, don’t run down your race. Leave that for the white people.”</p>
			<p>“I ain’t runnin’ down my people. But a fool’s a fool, wether he’s white or black. An’ I think de nigger who will spen’ his hard-earned money in dese yere new grog-shops is de biggest kine ob a fool, an’ I sticks ter dat. You know we didn’t hab all dese low places in slave times. An’ what is dey fer, but to get the people’s money. An’ its a shame how dey do sling de licker ’bout ’lection times.”</p>
			<p>“But don’t the temperance people want the colored people to vote the temperance ticket?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but some ob de culled people gits mighty skittish ef dey tries to git em to vote dare ticket ’lection time, an’ keeps dem at a proper distance wen de ’lection’s ober. Some ob dem say dere’s a trick behine it, an’ don’t want to tech it. Dese white folks could do a heap wid de culled folks ef dey’d only treat em right.”</p>
			<p>“When our people say there is a trick behind it,” said Robert, “I only wish they could see the trick before it⁠—the trick of worse than wasting their money, and of keeping themselves and families poorer and more ignorant than there is any need for them to be.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Bobby, I beliebs we might be a people ef it warn’t for dat mizzable drink. An’ Robby, I jis’ tells yer what I wants; I wants some libe man to come down yere an’ splain things ter dese people. I don’t mean a politic man, but a man who’ll larn dese people how to bring up dere chillen, to keep our gals straight, an’ our boys from runnin’ in de saloons an’ gamblin’ dens.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t your preachers do that?” asked Robert.</p>
			<p>“Well, some ob dem does, an’ some ob dem doesn’t. An’ wen dey preaches, I want dem to practice wat dey preach. Some ob dem says dey’s called, but I jis’ thinks laziness called some ob dem. An’ I thinks since freedom come deres some mighty pore sticks set up for preachers. Now dere’s John Anderson, Tom’s brudder; you ’member Tom.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; as brave a fellow and as honest as ever stepped in shoe leather.”</p>
			<p>“Well, his brudder war mighty diffrent. He war down in de lower kentry wen de war war ober. He war mighty smart, an’ had a good head-piece, an’ a orful glib tongue. He set up store an’ sole whisky, an’ made a lot ob money. Den he wanted ter go to de legislatur. Now what should he do but make out he’d got ’ligion, an’ war called to preach. He had no more ’ligion dan my ole dorg. But he had money an’ built a meetin’ house, whar he could hole meeting, an’ hab funerals; an’ you know cullud folks is mighty great on funerals. Well dat jis’ tuck wid de people, an’ he got ’lected to de legislatur. Den he got a fine house, an’ his ole wife warn’t good ’nuff for him. Den dere war a young school-teacher, an’ he begun cuttin’ his eyes at her. But she war as deep in de mud as he war in de mire, an’ he jis’ gib up his ole wife and married her, a fusty thing. He war a mean ole hypocrit, an’ I wouldn’t sen’ fer him to bury my cat. Robby, I’se down on dese kine ob preachers like a thousand bricks.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Aunt Linda, all the preachers are not like him.”</p>
			<p>“No; I knows dat; not by a jug full. We’s got some mighty good men down yere, an’ we’s glad when dey comes, an’ orful sorry when dey goes ’way. De las preacher we had war a mighty good man. He didn’t like too much hollerin’.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” said Robert, “he thought it were best for only one to speak at a time.”</p>
			<p>“I specs so. His wife war de nicest and sweetest lady dat eber I did see. None ob yer airish, stuck up folks, like a tarrapin carryin’ eberything on its back. She used ter hab meetins fer de mudders, an’ larn us how to raise our chillen, an’ talk so putty to de chillen. I sartinly did lub dat woman.”</p>
			<p>“Where is she now?” asked Robert.</p>
			<p>“De Conference moved dem ’bout thirty miles from yere. Deys gwine to hab a big meetin’ ober dere next Sunday. Don’t you ’member dem meetins we used to hab in de woods? We don’t hab to hide like we did den. But it don’t seem as ef de people had de same good ’ligion we had den. ’Pears like folks is took up wid makin’ money an’ politics.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Aunt Linda, don’t you wish those good old days would come back?”</p>
			<p>“No, chile; neber! neber! Wat fer you take me? I’d ruther lib in a corn-crib. Freedom needn’t keep me outer heben; an’ ef I’se sich a fool as ter lose my ’ligion cause I’se free, I oughtn’ ter git dere.”</p>
			<p>“But, Aunt Linda, if old Miss were able to take care of you, wouldn’t you just as leave be back again?”</p>
			<p>There was a faint quiver of indignation in Aunt Linda’s voice, as she replied:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Don’t yer want yer freedom? Well I wants ter pat my free foot. Halleluyah! But, Robby, I wants yer ter go ter dat big meetin’ de wuss kine.”</p>
			<p>“How will I get there?” asked Robert.</p>
			<p>“Oh, dat’s all right. My ole man’s got two ob de nicest mules you eber set yer eyes on. It’ll jis’ do yer good ter look at dem. I ’spect you’ll see some ob yer ole frens dere. Dere’s a nice settlemen’ of cullud folks ober dere, an’ I wants yer to come an’ bring dat young lady. I wants dem folks to see wat nice folks I kin bring to de meetin’. I hope’s yer didn’t lose all your ’ligion in de army.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I hope not,” replied Robert.</p>
			<p>“Oh, chile, yer mus’ be shore ’bout dat. I don’t want yer to ride hope’s hoss down to torment. Now be shore an’ come to-morrer an’ bring dat young lady, an’ take supper wid me. I’se all on nettles to see dat chile.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
