<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<p>I confess when I first learned that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harper was about to write “a story” on some features of the Anglo-African race, growing out of what was once popularly known as the “peculiar institution,” I had my doubts about the matter. Indeed it was far from being easy for me to think that she was as fortunate as she might have been in selecting a subject which would afford her the best opportunity for bringing out a work of merit and lasting worth to the race⁠—such a work as some of her personal friends have long desired to see from her graphic pen. However, after hearing a good portion of the manuscript read, and a general statement with regard to the object in view, I admit frankly that my partial indifference was soon swept away; at least I was willing to wait for further developments.</p>
			<p>Being very desirous that one of the race, so long distinguished in the cause of freedom for her intellectual worth as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harper has had the honor of being, should not at this late date in life make a blunder which might detract from her own good name, I naturally proposed to await developments before deciding too quickly in favor of giving encouragement to her contemplated effort.</p>
			<p>However, I was perfectly aware of the fact that she had much material in her possession for a most interesting book on the subject of the condition of the colored people in the South. I know of no other woman, white or colored, anywhere, who has come so intimately in contact with the colored people in the South as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harper. Since emancipation she has labored in every Southern State in the Union, save two, Arkansas and Texas; in the colleges, schools, churches, and the cabins not excepted, she has found a vast field and open doors to teach and speak on the themes of education, temperance, and good home building, industry, morality, and the like, and never lacked for evidences of hearty appreciation and gratitude.</p>
			<p>Everywhere help was needed, and her heart being deeply absorbed in the cause she willingly allowed her sympathies to impel her to perform most heroic services.</p>
			<p>With her it was no uncommon occurrence, in visiting cities or towns, to speak at two, three, and four meetings a day; sometimes to promiscuous audiences composed of everybody who would care to come.</p>
			<p>But the kind of meetings she took greatest interest in were meetings called exclusively for women. In this attitude she could pour out her sympathies to them as she could not do before a mixed audience; and indeed she felt their needs were far more pressing than any other class.</p>
			<p>And now I am prepared to most fully endorse her story. I doubt whether she could, if she had tried ever so much, have hit upon a subject so well adapted to reach a large number of her friends and the public with both entertaining and instructive matter as successfully as she has done in this volume.</p>
			<p>The grand and ennobling sentiments which have characterized all her utterances in laboring for the elevation of the oppressed will not be found missing in this book.</p>
			<p>The previous books from her pen, which have been so very widely circulated and admired, North and South⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Forest Leaves</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Miscellaneous Poems</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moses, a Story of the Nile</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems</i>, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sketches of Southern Life</i> (five in number)⁠—these, I predict, will be by far eclipsed by this last effort, which will, in all probability, be the crowning effort of her long and valuable services in the cause of humanity.</p>
			<p>While, as indicated, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harper has done a large amount of work in the South, she has at the same time done much active service in the temperance cause in the North, as thousands of this class can testify.</p>
			<p>Before the war she was engaged as a speaker by anti-slavery associations; since then, by appointment of the Women’s Christian Temperance Union, she has held the office of “Superintendent of Colored Work” for years. She has also held the office of one of the Directors of the Women’s Congress of the United States.</p>
			<p>Under the auspices of these influential, earnest, and intelligent associations, she has been seen often on their platforms with the leading lady orators of the nation.</p>
			<p>Hence, being widely known not only amongst her own race but likewise by the reformers, laboring for the salvation of the intemperate and others equally unfortunate, there is little room to doubt that the book will be in great demand and will meet with warm congratulations from a goodly number outside of the author’s social connections.</p>
			<p>Doubtless the thousands of colored Sunday-schools in the South, in casting about for an interesting, moral storybook, full of practical lessons, will not be content to be without <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Iola Leroy, or Shadows Uplifted</i>.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">William Still.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
